 Engaging Students in Science Controversy Through an Augmented
                                       Reality Role-Playing Game

                                     Eric Rosenbaum, Eric Klopfer, Britton Boughner
                                                         MIT
                                 eric_r@mit.edu, klopfer@mit.edu, boughner@mit.edu
                                                   Louisa Rosenheck
                                         Harvard Graduate School of Education
                                                rosenhlo@gse.harvard.edu

         Abstract: POSIT (developing Public Opinions on Science using Information Technology) is an
         augmented     reality role-playing  game  for networked    handheld  computers.     It is designed  to
         improve  engagement      in science   controversies and  develop  skills in evaluating   evidence and
         forming arguments. Groups of high school or college students investigate a scenario based on a
         fictionalized science controversy. They gather evidence from virtual characters and items situated
         in real locations and   compete    to develop the   most persuasive  arguments.    Preliminary  results
         suggest that this is a promising approach and further design experiments are needed.

Introduction
         Increasingly,  we are   faced with  science controversies  that have broad  implications  for society.  Students
need both greater engagement in the science controversies that affect them, and better tools to evaluate evidence and
form arguments. Here we report preliminary design experiments with a game aimed at meeting those needs.

         POSIT    (developing Public Opinions on Science using Information Technology) is an augmented reality
role-playing game for networked handheld computers.      Groups of high school or college students are introduced to a
scenario based   on a  fictionalized   science controversy,  gather evidence  about   it, and rate  each other   on their
arguments.

         POSIT builds on previous technical and pedagogical work with augmented reality games.          We have chosen
to situate the game and the players in the real world using handheld augmented reality technologies, because we
have seen   in previous  work   creating such   games  outdoors   (Klopfer &  Squire  2006)   and  indoors (Rosenbaum,
Klopfer & Perry 2006) that information from real world surroundings plays an important role in decision-making.
Studies of other augmented reality games have shown for example that students can become strongly engaged in
their simulated worlds (Facer, 2004), and can synthesize and evaluate evidence within the game in sophisticated
ways (Schrier, 2006).

         The design of POSIT also builds on related work using technology to track student opinions (Yoon, 2006)
during discussions around controversies in science.    Yoon's work demonstrated the importance of providing tools
for students to reflect on their own opinions and that of their peer groups.   There are also non-technological games
that influenced the design of POSIT, including Democs (Smith, 2005), a card-based activity which engages small
groups in debating public policy issues.

Research questions
   While POSIT is the center of a larger research program, for this initial study we chose to focus on two particular
questions of interest:

   1.    Does POSIT engage students' interest in a science controversy?
   2.    Does POSIT lead to improvements in the skills of evaluating evidence and forming arguments?

Game overview
         In our initial scenario, players face the question: "Should the University build a BSL-4 lab?"    BSL-4 is the
highest bio-safety level, required for the study of the most deadly pathogens. Players are given a briefing on the
game the day before, then a short introduction on the day of the game.       They play the game for 2 hours. Partway

                                                            608                                                 CSCL 2007
through the game and again at the end players meet and form pairs in order to rate each others' arguments.              At the
end of the game, there is a wrap-up discussion.

         Each player is randomly assigned one of ten roles, including a brief description of their background and
their potential stake in the proposed lab. These include a university student who lives near the proposed lab site, a
local  parent, a city councilor  and  a biotechnology     executive. Players enter    their opinion on   the question  using a
slider that ranges from -5 (no, the university should not build the lab) to +5 (yes, it should). A dynamically updated
histogram allows them to see the opinions of the other players.

         Players  walk  to various    buildings on  campus   in  order to  gather evidence.     The handheld device detects
which   building  the player  is in and   displays  the relevant  game  content.  An actual construction site on campus
represents the proposed lab site.

         A variety of virtual characters representing a range of opinions are distributed throughout the buildings in
the game. They are situated in realistic locations (e.g. there are virtual students in the actual dorms and virtual nurses
in  the actual medical  center).  Players  can  "interview"   them   to get  textual  responses    with  their opinion  on  the
controversy.   Virtual  items    such as   newspaper    articles,  journal  articles, technical    documents,   informational
pamphlets, photographs and advertisements are distributed among various locations. News flashes, text messages
and other bulletins arrive at fixed times, to a subset of players according to their role. This dynamic content is used
to create story lines that develop through the course of the game.

         Players can select the most persuasive evidence they have gathered (items, announcements and responses
from virtual characters) and add it to their "evidence portfolio." To receive scores, players form pairs in which one
player rates the other's argument.    The arguer sends her evidence portfolio to the rater, allowing the rater to examine
it. The arguer delivers a brief verbal argument, and the rater gives her a score according to a three-part rubric (basis
of the argument in facts, relevance of the argument to the arguer's role, and response to a rebuttal).

Research Methods
         POSIT is currently being pilot tested with high school and university level students. Formative evaluation
surveys, and video of game play and focus groups discussions are currently being analyzed.             Additionally, a pre/post
transfer test to assess skills in forming arguments has been pilot tested.

Results
         During   pilot tests we  observed   that   students were  able to  manipulate      the POSIT   user interface, gather
evidence, and present their arguments to each other.       Students were engaged in the fictional scenario content, and
appeared to understand how to play their roles and how to rate each other's arguments.

         On surveys, students reported enjoying the story lines and "news flashes."             Aside from technical glitches,
they disliked walking around a lot, having to read messages that were too long, and receiving inaccurate ratings
from their peers. We hope to address these problems with more densely placed game locations, shorter texts and the
addition of videos, and improved game mechanics.

         Some    students also   reported that  the rating system  helped  them   improve    their arguments   because  e.g. it
"made you realize some things did not back your argument as much as you thought," it "made people have to back
up their ideas" and it "[made] your argument stronger and efficient." Some students reported changing their opinions
on the controversy due to testimony from virtual characters. For example: "reading the messages from the characters
helped  me  view  different   perspectives of   these characters  like the firefighter, Molly    [etc]." Some   students were
affected by the physical situation of the proposed construction site in forming their opinions. For example: "I saw
the spot where the building was set to be built on and it was very scary how many students and people walked by it
constantly."

         Analysis of the pre/post test suggests that after playing the game students form more arguments that are
better  based  on facts and   more  representative  of  a  role. Additional studies   with  a   larger number   and variety  of
students will be needed to clarify these results.

                                                              609                                                    CSCL 2007
Future Directions
        The game mechanics have evolved throughout our pilot tests. In an initial version, the game was primarily
focused on players' opinions. The goal was to sway your fellow players toward your position in order to affect a
vote at the end of the game.   The incentives for gathering evidence and attempting persuasion were insufficiently
clear. In our first attempt to give players a clearer goal, we created a simple dynamic opinion model for the virtual
characters, so that players could "persuade" them.     Players could send their evidence portfolio to virtual characters
in order to change their opinions. If the portfolio contained highly persuasive evidence that had not yet been "seen"
by the virtual character, its opinion would change. The virtual characters would then also participate in the vote at
the end of the game.

        To increase the focus on players interacting with each other (instead of only persuading virtual characters),
we introduced the argument rating system described above.        This system gives players a clear incentive to pair up
and deliver verbal arguments, and gives immediate feedback in the form of a score.     One problem with this system is
that it does not prevent unreliable ratings, including cheating. To partly mitigate this we divide the students into two
groups; within groups they compete for highest argument score, but they only give each other rating scores across
groups.

        In future tests we hope to evolve the argument rating system to further clarify the game goals for the player
while rewarding effective argumentation techniques.      One possibility is to give each player a "weakness," which is
the category of argument to which they respond (e.g. scientific or emotional).      Players are rated according to how
well their argument  matches   the  rater's weakness.    This   adds the elements   of considering   the audience when
formulating an argument,   selecting evidence   to match  argument   categories,  and  using evidence flexibly to make
different types of arguments.

Conference Demo
        The  demonstration    will include   a playable   demo   version  of  the game   running  on  several  handheld
computers.  In the demo version, most game functionality and content is available, without the wireless location-
awareness feature. Video of students playing the game will be available as well.

References
Facer, K., Joiner, R., Stanton, D., Reid, J., Hull, R., & Kirk, D. (2004). Savannah: Mobile gaming and learning?
        Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20(6), 399-409.
Klopfer, E. and K. Squire. (2005). Environmental detectives ­ The development of an augmented reality platform
        for environmental simulations.  In Press for Educational Technology Research and Development.
Rosenbaum, E., Klopfer, E., and Perry, J. (2006). On location learning: authentic applied science with networked
        augmented realities.  In Press for Journal of Science Education and Technology.
Schrier, Karen. (2006).  Using  augmented      reality games  to teach  21st century skills. In ACM   SIGGRAPH    2006
        Educators  Program    (Boston, Massachusetts,     July  30 - August  03,  2006). SIGGRAPH     '06. ACM    Press,
        New York, NY, 15.
Smith,  Karen. (2005).  Discussing   animal  experimentation     using Democs,    a card activity to teach  science and
        citizenship. School Science Review, 87(319), 81-84.
Yoon, S. (2006). An evolutionary approach to harnessing complex systems thinking in the science and technology
        classroom. In press for International Journal of Science Education.

Acknowledgements
This project was supported by the Microsoft-MIT iCampus initiative.

                                                            610                                                CSCL 2007
