    How Does Net-Based Interdisciplinary Collaboration Change with
                                      Growing Domain Expertise?
                                            Nikol Rummel, Sabine Hauser, Hans Spada
                 Institute of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Engelbergerstr. 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
                                        [firstname.lastname]@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

         Abstract:   This    study    examined      how    growing   domain      expertise     influences  net-based
         interdisciplinary   collaboration   of   persons  with   medical    and psychological      background.    We
         compared the quality of the collaborative process and the joint solution of interdisciplinary dyads
         of different expertise levels (advanced students, trainees, and experts) working on a patient case.
         To assess the quality of the collaborative process, a rating scheme developed by Meier et al. (in
         press) was used. Additionally, process log files measuring individual and joint time and number of
         work phases were gathered, and joint solutions were analyzed. As had been assumed, the experts
         scored lower than the less experienced dyads in most measures of collaborative process. Looking
         in more  detail  at the  less experienced     dyads revealed   that the  trainee  dyads    outperformed   the
         student dyads in most of the process variables. Analyses of process logfiles revealed the same
         pattern regarding the number of phases used. The predictions for the quality of the joint solution
         were more difficult and the results for these variables more mixed.

Introduction
         Studies on expertise development in different domains have revealed how experts' knowledge and the ways
they solve domain-specific problems differ from those of novices (Feltovich, Prietula, & Ericsson, 2006). Also, it
was shown that expert knowledge and problem solving behaviour differ across domains. Against this background,
one would   expect  that experts  from  different   domains   should    also differ  in  their interdisciplinary collaborative
behaviour from laypersons or intermediates when asked to solve complex problems in a team. But even though
interdisciplinary collaboration   among     experienced   professionals  is  increasingly  becoming    important   for solving
complex  problems   in   society,   economy,    and  science,   studies investigating     social  and cognitive  processes   of
interdisciplinary collaboration   are  rare (Bromme,    1999).   Existing articles   primarily   describe informal  studies  on
successful and unsuccessful aspects of interdisciplinary work observed in the field (e.g. Epstein, 2005) or propose
models intended to enhance such collaboration (McDaniel, 1995). The central question of the present study was,
how growing domain experience influences net-based interdisciplinary collaboration. Two strands of research have
motivated   this  study. First,  in the  last   six years  our    team  has  investigated     the net-based   interdisciplinary
collaboration among     students of psychology      and of medicine     (Hermann,    Rummel,     &  Spada, 2001;   Rummel    &
Spada, 2005; Rummel, Spada, & Hauser, 2006). A second focus of work in our team has been on the investigation
of expertise in complex domains. Early studies examined expertise in the domain of physics (Lay & Spada, 2000;
Plötzner &  Spada,  1993),   a  recent study  examined     expertise development      in  the  domain  of clinical psychology
(Hauser, Spada, & Rummel, 2006). Thus, our research has been influenced by the CSCL literature as well as by
research in cognitive science on expertise development. In the following paragraphs we will describe these two areas
of research in more detail in order to derive hypotheses for the actual study.

Net-Based Interdisciplinary Collaboration
         Our  research   has focused   on   the question   of   how  to support   and    improve   net-based  interdisciplinary
collaboration by   means     of  instruction.   In  particular,  we  have    chosen    to  investigate  the   interdisciplinary
collaboration of persons with medical and psychological background, because collaboration is essential in this area.
Secondly, we have focused on a net-based collaboration setting, because innovative computer-mediated settings
open up  new  opportunities   for collaboration    across distance   and  time.  This  is important   for the practicability of
interdisciplinary collaborations  and  thus   for  the practical relevance   of  our  research,  as many   times experts from
different domains will not be co-located and face to face meetings are very time consuming. In the context of joint
medical diagnosis, video conferencing systems have been advocated as a particularly suitable solution (Köhler &
Trimpop, 2004).

         In our   prior  studies (Rummel     &  Spada,    2005;  Rummel     et  al., 2006) advanced    medical   students and
advanced students of psychology collaborated on complex patient cases via a videoconferencing system. In two

                                                              611                                                    CSCL 2007
experiments we tested the influence of instructional measures on collaboration. Our experiments consisted of two
phases: In a first phase, the learning phase, participants were instructed how to collaborate effectively by a script or
they observed a model collaboration. In the second phase, the test phase, collaboration partners collaborated without
further instruction. In this phase the learning effects of script or model were assessed by analyzing the collaborative
process and its outcome, the joint solution. Observing a model collaboration proved to be a particularly effective
method to instruct collaboration, and even more so if it was augmented by additional elaboration support (Rummel
et al., 2006). Learning from scripted collaboration yielded mixed results: positive ones in the first study and not so
good ones    in  the   second   study   (Rummel      et al.,  2006).   The   main  result of   both  our  studies   was  that   good
collaboration can be instructed. Another product of this research was the development of a rating scheme that allows
assessing the quality of collaborative processes (Meier, Spada, & Rummel, in press). Based on an iterative cycle of
extensive literature search and detailed qualitative analyses of successful and unsuccessful dyads' collaboration, we
developed a rating scheme that assesses the quality of collaboration processes reliably and in an efficient way. This
rating scheme comprises nine dimensions (a more detailed description is provided below) and evaluates aspects of
the communication, joint information processing, coordination, interpersonal relationship, and motivational aspects.

         One limitation on this research is that the findings that have resulted from studies with advanced students
could not simply be generalized to the collaboration among more experienced persons. However, it is particularly
the experts of different domains who are required to collaborate in order to solve complex problems occurring in the
real world.

Expertise Development
         But  what     exactly  is  expertise?   Research     in cognitive   science  has   investigated  this  question   from  the
pioneering work of de Groot (1965) on chess expertise to research in manifold domains today (for an overview, see
Ericsson, Charness, Feltovich, & Hoffmann, 2006). As a background for the present study, research on expertise
development in the domains of medicine (e.g. Boshuizen, 2003, 2004; Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992) and clinical
psychology (Hauser et al., 2006) is particularly relevant:

         Medical     expertise  has    attracted much    research    attention  since the 1970s,     resulting in a  large  body  of
literature (e.g. Boshuizen      &   Schmidt,  1992;     Boshuizen,     2003; 2004;    Elstein, Shulman,   &    Sprafka, 1978).   To
examine expertise development in the domain of medicine, researchers have usually constructed a text-based case
study and have asked physicians and novices to think aloud while working on it (e. g. Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992).
After diagnosing the case, participants were asked to elaborate on their assessment of the signs and symptoms (post-
hoc pathophysiological explanations). With this approach, novices, intermediate and advanced students of medicine,
and expert physicians with an average of four years of work experience have been compared. Regarding the quality
of diagnoses,   an   increase   up  to the level  of expert   physicians    was found  (Boshuizen,     2004;   Rikers,  Schmidt,  &
Boshuizen, 2002). Earlier studies on expertise had revealed that the amount and structure of knowledge is one main
factor that separates novices from experts (Feltovich et al., 2006), Boshuizen and colleagues also investigated the
development of knowledge with growing domain expertise. They postulated three steps in the development of a
medical expert: First, medical students acquire large amounts of declarative knowledge about biomedical processes.
The  representation     of this knowledge    can   be   understood     as a loosely   connected   semantic  network.    With    some
clinical experience,      declarative  knowledge     is then  proceduralized    in  a  process    of "knowledge     encapsulation".
Encapsulated    knowledge     pertains  to  higher-order     concepts  under    which  lower-order    concepts  are  subsumed.    In
routine work, experts verbalize only higher-order concepts. Researchers can detect knowledge encapsulations by
comparing    the    experts'    post-hoc   explanations      with  think-aloud    protocols.   The    phenomena     of  knowledge
encapsulation    led   to lower  scores  for the  experts     in the number    of  recalled  case  statements  (e.g. Boshuizen    &
Schmidt, 1992). However, if asked to do so, or when problems arose, experts were able to verbalize lower-order
concepts.  Thus,    Boshuizen    and   colleagues  found  a   linear   increase in the amount     of post-hoc   pathophysiological
explanations.   In  a  final step,  the clinical experience      helps the  medical   expert to   develop illness  scripts for  each
disease. An illness script consists of enabling conditions (conditions and constraints of a disease), the fault (major
malfunctions in bodily processes), and consequences (signs and symptoms). To summarize the results on expertise
development      in   medicine:     Boshuizen    and    colleagues     found   an  increase    in the  amount     of   clinical and
pathophysiological knowledge as well as in the quality of diagnoses (Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992; Boshuizen, 2003,
2004; Rikers et al., 2002).

         In one     of our   own studies   (Hauser   et  al., 2006)    we examined    whether   expertise in   clinical psychology
develops   similar   to   expertise in  medicine.  We    compared      psychologists  at  five different  training  levels: novice,

                                                                  612                                                      CSCL 2007
intermediate  and  advanced    students,   graduated  trainee therapists  (at least in  the  second  year   of their  obligatory
therapeutic on-the-job-training) and expert psychotherapists at least ten years after graduation. All participants had
to complete an instrument consisting of three parts: (1) A knowledge test measuring basic psychological knowledge
(e.g. classic conditioning),   the  application  of the basics   to clinical psychology   (e.g. Mowrers     2-factor  theory of
avoidance learning), and knowledge in the area of clinical psychology (e.g. Becks cognitive triad). (2) A set of open-
format questions that asked participants to write down as much as they know about one basic concept (schedules of
reinforcement) and one clinical concept (schizophrenia). (3) The main part of the instrument consisted of two text-
based   patient cases   (e.g. describing   a  patient with a  social  phobia). Similar    to  the studies   by  Boshuizen   and
colleagues  (e.g. Rikers,  et  al., 2002)  participants   had to skim   the  case, recall important   information    in writing,
diagnose the described patient, and finally explain the signs and symptoms. Three result patterns were found: On all
variables measuring basic principles of psychology, the scores were highest in the first years of university studies,
then knowledge decreased. On the variables measuring clinical knowledge, we found an increase up to the level of
trainee therapists, then, at the expert level, knowledge decreased again. Pattern three was only found in the two
diagnoses; the quality of diagnoses rose at the level of the intermediate students and then levelled off. Comparing
these results to the studies on expertise in medicine, we can conclude that similar to novice students in medicine
novice  students  in  psychology    first  acquire  declarative  knowledge    about   basic  principles of  psychology.   With
practical experience, clinical psychological knowledge is acquired. Clinical psychological knowledge increased up
to the level of trainee therapists, but in contrast to studies in medicine, decreased at the level of expert therapists. At
the level of the trainee therapists we found some indications of knowledge encapsulation. At the expert level, more
than ten years after graduation, basic psychological and theoretical clinical psychological knowledge had decreased
and we did not find a clear indication of knowledge encapsulations. This did, however, not impair their diagnostic
abilities: experts scored as high as advanced students and trainee therapists on the diagnoses. A further study is
planned to examine the existence of illness scripts.

          Individual  problem   solving    as investigated in   studies on   expertise  development     is only  one  aspect of
experts' work life. However, often experts are required to solve complex problems in collaboration with others. In
these cases they do not only collaborate with other experts from their own domain, but often in an interdisciplinary
context. Knowledge encapsulation and even more the loss of basic knowledge, but also the formation of illness
scripts of experts   may   complicate   the  development   of  common    ground    (Clark   & Brennan,     1991)  and   therefore
interdisciplinary collaboration.

          The   present study   aimed   at  overcoming    the shortcomings    of   both the  studies on    computer-supported
collaboration and the research on expertise development discussed above. In addition to our previous studies with
students,  we   wanted  to investigate    net-based   interdisciplinary collaboration   across  different  levels  of expertise.
Thus, not only students at different stages of their education, but also job beginners and experienced professionals
took part in this study. Also, building on studies of expertise development in individuals, we wanted to examine the
collaboration of people with growing expertise and from different domains.

Hypotheses
          The   main goal  of  our  study   was  to examine   how    growing  domain    experience   influences   collaborative
process and outcome in an interdisciplinary, net-based setting. In our scenario a physician and a psychotherapist, or
students from these disciplines, collaborated on solving a complex case study using a desktop videoconferencing
system. Specifically, we investigated collaboration at three levels of expertise: student, trainee and expert. At all
three levels dyads consisting of one partner from each of the two domains collaborated. At the student level, medical
students  who   were  at least  in  their  third clinical semester   (forth  year  of study)  collaborated   with   students of
psychology who had completed their specialization in clinical psychology (also in the forth year). At the trainee
level, residents who had been working in a hospital for at least one year after graduation collaborated with trainee
therapists who were at least in the second year of their on-the-job training after graduation. In Germany, medical
doctors  and  psychologists    have  to   complete    postgraduate  professional   training  in order   to become     a medical
specialist or a psychotherapist. They are only allowed to establish an own practice after this training. And finally at
the expert-level, physicians    working    as general  practitioners collaborated   with  psychotherapists.    All  experts had
worked in patient care for at least 10 years. It should be noted, however, that the expert psychotherapists, in contrast
to the psychological trainee therapists, had not engaged in a certified postgraduate training at their time because this
was not obligatory until 1998 in Germany. Collaborating partners did not know each other before taking part in the
study. We carefully chose the degree of specialization of the two partners in order to model a collaborative scenario
as  authentic as  possible.   For example,    one  can easily  think of  a   scenario where   a patient    consults his general

                                                              613                                                     CSCL 2007
practitioner because of a chronic disease, the general practitioner then notices that his patient also shows symptoms
of a mental disease and consults with a psychotherapist. Most studies on expertise development in medicine were,
however,   conducted  not  with  general   practitioners but    with even  more   specialized physicians,   for example,
cardiologists. Thus, predictions from this research could only be made with care. For the psychological participants,
in contrast, our predictions were more straightforward because these were mainly the same participants who also
took part in our study on expertise development in clinical psychology (Hauser et al., 2006).

          We assumed that the growing domain expertise could have various positive but also negative effects on
their collaboration: Hinds (1999) labeled the difficulties of experts to take the perspective of a layperson and design
their communication accordingly "the curse of expertise". Interdisciplinary communication can be characterized as
mutual expert-layperson communication (Bromme, Jucks, & Rambow, 2004; Rummel & Spada, 2005): each partner
is expert in his own domain, but (at least relatively) novice in the other's domain. On the basis of this literature we
can, for example, assume that experts will give highly abstract explanations that might not be understood by their
partner  from  the other  domain   (Hinds,   Patterson,  &  Pfeffer,  2001).  Given   the above    research on  expertise
development, experts could also have forgotten some basic knowledge (Hauser et al., 2006) and thus could not be
able to exchange as much information as students or trainees (or at least not as easily if knowledge encapsulation as
described by Boshuizen and Schmidt, 1992, is the case). Moreover, experts could see less need to exchange domain
specific information than participants with less experience, because they might implicitly feel the sole responsibility
for their own domain part (Bromme & Nückles, 1998). Consequently, collaborating experts might arrive at a joint
solution  rather intuitively (Dreyfus  &     Dreyfus,  1986)  not discussing   their  arguments  with  their  partner. A
precondition for discussion is awareness of the partner's knowledge and expertise. However, Bromme & Nückles,
1998, found that physicians seldom took notice of the difference between their own perspective of a patient and the
perspective of nurses. In their study physicians were thus not likely to profit from the nurses' knowledge. In turn,
novices might be more willing to take up alternative perspectives offered by a partner as they are less sure about
their abilities to solve the case at hand. In the terminology of Heckhausen and Gollwitzer (1987), novices could be
characterized as being in a motivational state of mind, whereas experts could be described as being in a volitional
state of mind. In a motivational state of mind, people actively search for information and consider alternatives. They
have not yet decided for a specific action and are trying to incorporate any relevant information in their decision
making. In contrast, in a volitional state of mind, people focus on following through with an already made action
plan. Thus,  they  lock themselves   up   to any   new  incoming  information   and  centre  their attention on   the one
alternative. Perhaps  experts' interaction   is in general less  reciprocal  than the interaction  of persons   with  less
experience because experts are used to adopting the leadership in their team. This could also affect dimensions like
dialogue management (e.g., turn taking) and task management negatively.

          Predictions for the outcome of the collaboration, the joint solution, were more difficult. Studies on expertise
development in both domains have revealed that experts' diagnoses are as good as or better than those of advanced
students. Consequently, we hypothesized that expert dyads, based on their large clinical experience, would score
equally high or higher than less experienced dyads on the diagnoses. On the other hand, our case study was designed
in such a way that a combination of medical and psychotherapeutic knowledge was required to come to a good
solution. Therefore,  not only   the individual  knowledge    of the  interacting partners, but also  the quality of   the
collaboration during which the knowledge resources are combined plays an important role. If the partners do not
pool their knowledge, they might fail to arrive at a good solution even if they would have the prerequisites. With
regard to therapy planning: Research on expertise development in the medical domain has so far concentrated on
measuring diagnostic skills and neglected the investigation of the development of therapeutic skills (Norman, Eva,
Brooks,   &  Hamstra, 2006).  In clinical psychology   such   research is also rare. In one of  the  few existing studies
Caspar (1993) showed that during intake interviews inexperienced therapists verbalized more contents related to
their own thinking. In contrast, experts information processing was more selective, automated, and complex. As they
were less preoccupied with self-monitoring, experienced therapists had more cognitive resources available for the
planning of therapy steps. Thus, we assumed that the more experienced participants would score as high as or even
higher than less experienced dyads regarding the quality of their therapy plan.

Method

Sample and Design
          Twenty-seven  dyads  (54   participants) took  part in the  study. Three expertise  levels were   implemented:
student, trainee, and expert. Participants collaborated in dyads within their particular level of expertise. Dyads each

                                                            614                                                 CSCL 2007
consisted of one partner from the field of psychology and one from the field of medicine. Eleven advanced student
dyads (students), ten intermediate dyads (trainees), and six expert dyads (experts) were composed (see Table 1).

Table 1: Sample and design of the study
 Student Level:                             Trainee Level:                                Expert Level:
 Advanced medical students                  Physicians in their residency                 General practitioners collaborating
 collaborating with advanced                collaborating with postgraduate               with psychotherapists, (both at least
 students of psychology                     trainee therapists                            ten years after graduation)

 n (dyads) = 11                             n (dyads) = 10                                n (dyads) = 6

Procedure
         After an initial introduction, the two partners of each dyad were seated in different rooms and received
training with the computer-mediated setting. In this training, all technical skills needed to complete the tasks were
taught. Participants learned to work with the desktop videoconference system, and with the shared and individual
editors. After the technical training they received a text-based case study (752 words) describing a woman suffering
from   physiological   and  psychological      symptoms,    and    some  domain-specific      physiological    and  psychological
literature. Participants were   given   15  minutes  to  read   the case   study and  to  skim    the text  material.  During  this
individual  preparation  phase  they    were   not allowed  to  speak   to each  other.   Next,   participants collaborated   on a
threefold   task: (1)  They were   asked    to diagnose    the  case   (multiple sclerosis    and  major   depression),   (2) state
differential diagnoses (for example borreliosis, adjustment disorder), and (3) plan medical and psychological therapy
steps for the main diagnoses. The time to complete these tasks was limited to 60 minutes. During the collaboration
phase, participants communicated via a desktop videoconference system with the audio-video connection, individual
text editors to take notes, and a shared text editor to compile the joint solution. Finally, each participant individually
filled out a post-test measuring knowledge about important aspects of collaborating well in an interdisciplinary, net-
based setting, and a questionnaire asking for the perceived helpfulness of such collaboration.

Dependent Variables
         Dependent variables on the collaborative process and on the joint solution were assessed. To analyze the
quality of collaborative process we applied a rating scheme that allows assessing collaboration quality by comparing
a dyad's interaction with a pre-defined standard (Meier et al., in press). The rating scheme had been developed in
two previous studies that had tested the effects of instructional measures on a subsequent unsupported collaboration
(Rummel & Spada, 2005; Rummel et al., 2006). Based on qualitative analyses of transcribed collaboration dialogue
from   the  first study,  and   theoretical    concepts    from   the  relevant  literature,  nine    dimensions    of  successful
collaboration had been defined. Then, the rating scheme had been applied to data from the second study, where it
had helped detecting effects of instruction on the subsequent collaboration and had proven to be a valid and reliable
assessment   method    (Meier   et al., in  press). The    rating  scheme   comprises     the following    nine dimensions:     (1)
Sustaining   mutual   understanding   measures     the extent   to which   participants   express  themselves   intelligibly,  e.g.
whether they explain technical terms when using them or whether they tailor their contributions to the knowledge of
their partner.    (2) Dialogue   management        assesses turn    taking  and   other   aspects  of   communicative      process
coordination.  (3)  Information    Pooling  denotes    the extent   to which  the   partners  take responsibility   for their own
domain, whether they see the partner as resource to gather information from the other domain, and the extent to
which information from both domains is referenced in the solution. (4) Reaching consensus evaluates the decision
making process, for instance, whether the partners critically discuss and mutually evaluate their arguments before
coming to a decision. (5) Task division measures the extent to which the participants plan their solution process and
divide the   task  in meaningful   subtasks    that are  solved    individually  or  in   collaboration. (6)   Time   management
assesses  how  participants deal   with    the time available   for   solving the   task. (7) Technical    coordination   assesses
whether   technical   resources such    as the  individual  editors    and the   shared   editor  are used  effectively   and how
participants deal  with  technical  problems    arising.   (8) Reciprocal   interaction   examines    whether   the interaction  is
symmetrical,   respectful,  and  whether    both   partners    can  contribute   to their joint   solution  in equal   shares.  (9)
Individual task orientation (psych. or med.) is a dimension relating to motivational aspects in the behaviour of the
partners. Task orientation is the commitment of each partner to work towards solving the task, his or her willingness
to put effort in  the  collaboration,   and the  extent  to which     volitional strategies   are used.  In contrast   to all other
dimensions, we assessed this dimension on the level of the individual rather than the dyad. Thus, effectively ten

                                                                615                                                       CSCL 2007
variables resulted from the process ratings. Each variable was rated on a five-point rating scale ranging from 0 (very
bad) to 4 (very good). The ratings were made as the rater watched the videotaped collaboration of a dyad. In order to
reduce cognitive load on the raters, each dyad's videotape was segmented into three parts. The three parts were
consecutively rated on  the ten variables  of the  rating scheme.    Finally the  three ratings for each  variable  were
aggregated. These aggregated values are reported in the results section below. In addition to applying the rating
scheme to assess the quality of the collaborative process, we gathered process data from logfiles. Our earlier studies
have revealed  that   working also    individually is essential  for the  quality of  collaborative  solutions because
participants need this individual time to reflect their joint considerations on the background of their own domain
knowledge (Hermann et al., 2001; Rummel & Spada, 2005). But, individual work is often neglected in computer-
mediated collaboration (Hermann et al., 2001). Thus, we measured the amount of individual or joint work, and the
number and length of work phases from the logfiles. To asses the quality of the joint solution, the solutions of all
dyads were blind rated by a medical and a psychotherapeutic expert. Each expert rated the quality of the diagnoses,
differential diagnoses and therapy steps for her domain (medicine and clinical psychology) on a six-point scale (1 =
very bad to 6 = very good).

Results and Discussion

Collaborative Process
       We had hypothesized that experts would score lower than advanced students and trainees with regard to
particular aspects of the  collaborative process.  In terms   of the dimensions   of the  rating scheme   the following
variables could be affected: dialogue management, information pooling, reaching consensus, reciprocal interaction,
task division. Table 2 gives an overview of the means and standard deviations of the ratings of the collaborative
processes.  A multivariate  analysis  of variance  (MANOVA)      of  the ten process  variables  revealed a   marginally
significant overall effect for the expertise level (F (2, 24) = 1.9, p = .05, ² = .62). Subsequent ANOVAs showed
that the trainee dyads scored best followed by the students and the experts formed the taillight. Altogether, eight out
of ten dimensions showed this pattern. Consistent with our assumptions we found substantial group differences on
the following dimensions: information pooling (F (2, 24) = 3.34, p = 0.05, ² = 0.22), technical coordination (F (2,
24) = 6.39, p = 0.01, ² = 0.35), and reciprocal interaction (F (2, 24) = 4.46, p = 0.02, ² = 0.27). Figure 1 illustrates
this pattern by showing the means for the dimension reciprocal interaction. On five other variables the same pattern
was  found  (sustaining  mutual understanding,     dialogue   management,    reaching   consensus,  task  division, task
orientation psychological participant), however, the group differences did not reach the significance level. Other
patterns were found only for the variables time management and task orientation medical participants. However, the
differences were small and did not reach the significance level.

Table 2: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the ratings of collaboration quality.+
                                                Students                     Trainees                  Experts
 Sustaining mutual understanding                2.88 (0.73)                    2.93 (0.78)               2.72 (0.90)
 Dialogue management                            2.58 (1.03)                    2.97 (0.90)               1.94 (0.93)
 Information Pooling*                           2.42 (0.79)                    3.17 (0.79)               2.22 (0.86)
 Reaching Consensus                             2.58 (0.92)                    2.78 (1.26)               2.17 (0.69)
 Task Division                                  2.02 (1.01)                    2.60 (1.07)               1.33 (0.60)
 Time Management                                0.88(1.11)                     0.63 (0.60)               0.94 (0.71)
 Technical Coordination*                        2.79 (0.83)                    3.18 (0.85)               1.64 (0.87)
 Reciprocal Interaction*                        2.64 (1.18)                    3.27 (0.56)               1.83 (0.91)
 Individual task orientation (med.)             3.33 (0.49)                    2.87 (0.89)               2.83 (1.01)
 Individual task orientation (psych.)           2.85 (0.58)                    3.10 (0.97)               2.56 (0.62)
+Scores range from 0 = very bad to 4 = very good, *p  .05

                                                          616                                                 CSCL 2007
                                                                4,0

                                                                3,5                                           3,27

                                                                3,0
                                                                                 2,64

                                                                2,5

                                                                2,0                                                                        1,83

                                                                1,5

                                                                1,0

                                                                0,5

                                                                0,0
                                                                               Students                     Trainees                     E x pert s

                     Figure 1: Results for the process dimension reciprocal interaction

        Table 3 shows the results of the logfile analysis. Overall, participants spent more than twice as much time
on  collaborative work  than  on individual                             work.           The  time  spent              working individually                 decreased  with  growing
expertise. Given the small sample and the relatively high variances within the expertise levels, the group differences
did, however, not reach the significance level (amount of collaborative work: F (2, 24) = 1.41, p = 0.26, ² = 0.11;
individual work: F (2, 24) = 1.57, p = .23, ² = 0.12). As former studies (Hermann et al., 2001; Rummel & Spada,
2005) have revealed, individual work is positively related to the joint outcome. In accordance with these findings,
the average correlation of the amount of individual work with the variables of the quality of the joint solution (see
Table 4) was r = .30. Concerning the number of phases, the expertise levels differed significantly (F (2, 24) = 5.26,
p = .01, ² = .30). Students alternated more often between joint and individual work than trainees and experts. For
this variable, the average correlation with the outcome variables was r = .26.

Table 3: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the logfile data
                                                                          Students                                            Trainees                                Experts
 Collaborative Time (minutes)                                            41.91 (9.67)                                     47.10 (8.13)                         49.00 (10.16)
 Individual Time (minutes)                                               17.45 (9.65)                                     12.90 (8.13)                              9.83 (8.52)
 Number of Phases*                                                       10.82 (4.45)                                     7.10 (2.56)                               5.83 (1.94)
*p.05

Joint Solutions
        The ratings of the joint solutions are shown in Table 4. The medical ratings were given by a medical expert,
the psychological  ratings by a  psychotherapeutic                                      expert. On  the              medical ratings                 no significant differences  were
found between expertise levels; neither for the diagnoses, nor for the differential diagnoses, nor for the planned
therapy steps. Multiple sclerosis is a rather uncommon diagnose for general practitioners. Perhaps we asked too
much of them when presenting them with this complex disease. On the psychological ratings a significant difference
between expertise levels was found regarding the differential diagnoses The trainee dyads scored best, followed by
the student dyads and, finally the expert dyads (F (2, 24) = 4.63, p = .02, ² = 0.28). Although not significant (F (2,
24) = 1.78, p = 0.19, ² = 0.13), the same descriptive pattern could be found in the diagnoses. This result contradicts
assumptions we had derived from experts' performance in diagnosing in the Hauser at al. (2006) study. Contrary to
the present study, expert psychotherapists had scored as high as less experienced psychologists on the diagnoses.

Table 4: Means and standard deviations (in Parentheses) for the expert ratings of the joint solutions.+
                                                                           Students                                        Trainees                                 Experts
 Medical Ratings
 Diagnoses                                                                4.00 (1.84)                                     3.40 (1.51)                               3.50 (1.38)
 Differential Diagnoses                                                   4.18 (0.87)                                     4.50 (0.71)                               3.67 (0.82)
 Therapy Steps                                                            3.82 (1.60)                                     3.10 (1.29)                               2.33 (1.21)
 Psychological Ratings
 Diagnoses                                                                4.55 (1.37)                                     4.90 (0.99)                               3.67 (1.51)
 Differential Diagnoses*                                                  2.73 (1.42)                                     3.70 (1.16)                               1.83 (0.75)
 Therapy Steps                                                            4.73 (1.01)                                     4.60 (1.17)                               5.00 (1.67)
+Scores range from 1 = very bad to 6 = very good, *p  .05

                                                                                              617                                                                           CSCL 2007
General Discussion and Outlook
         The main goal of the present study was to examine how growing domain expertise influences net-based
interdisciplinary collaboration of persons with medical and psychological background. Consequently, process and
outcome of collaborations at different expertise levels were compared. Advanced students of medicine and clinical
psychology    collaborated   with   each  other, physicians    in  their  residency collaborated    with postgraduate   trainee
therapists,  and   experienced    general    practitioners   collaborated   with    experienced     psychotherapists.   In  our
collaborative  setting  participants  did  not  meet  in  person   but   collaborated via  a videoconferencing    system   with
individual text editors and a shared one. Their joint task was to diagnose a complex case study, state differential
diagnoses, and plan therapy steps. As the patient showed symptoms of a medical disease (multiple sclerosis) as well
as  a mental   disease   (major   depression),    the  task   could   only  be   solved   with  interdisciplinary  effort. The
collaborations of all 27 dyads were video-recorded. To assess the quality of the collaborative processes a rating
scheme   developed   by Meier    et  al. (in press) was   applied.   This rating scheme    consisted of  the nine  dimensions:
sustaining  mutual  understanding,    dialogue   management,      information  pooling,    reaching consensus,  task   division,
time management, technical coordination, reciprocal interaction, and individual task orientation. In addition to the
process ratings, log files were analyzed for individual and joint time, and the number of work phases. Also, the joint
solutions of the case were analyzed.

         As we had hypothesized, expert dyads scored lowest on most variables of the collaborative process ratings.
We also found that trainee dyads outperformed student dyads on most of these variables. Particularly clear results
were  found   for  information   pooling,  reciprocal interaction,   and  technical coordination.   For  the  variables mutual
understanding, dialogue management, task coordination, and individual task orientation the same pattern resulted,
but the differences did not yield statistical significance. Analyses of process logfiles revealed that experts spent more
time working collaboratively and less time working individually than trainees and students, although this result did
not become statistically significant. Also they alternated less frequently between the two modes. As had been found
in former studies (Hermann et al., 2001; Rummel & Spada, 2005), the amount of individual work was positively
correlated with the quality of the joint outcome. Also, a higher number of work phases correlated positively with a
better solution. We can conclude that a more balanced collaboration, with a greater proportion of individual work
and a  more    frequent alternation  between     modes    of interaction, could  have   improved    the outcome   of  the  more
experienced dyads. In interpreting the results let us go back to the studies on expertise development in medicine and
clinical psychology    cited in  the introduction   (e.g. Boshuizen,     2004; Hauser   et al., 2006).  Based  on  the  findings
regarding knowledge encapsulations, decrease in theoretical knowledge, and the formation of illness scripts, we
assumed   that large   practical experience     would  affect  the   exchange  of information    on  the case. Together    with
potentially arising social processes such experts taking over leadership and responsibility for the own domain, this
might explain the findings on the collaborative process in the present study. However, the situation is not as negative
at it may seem. In the present study we only looked at unsupported collaboration. From our earlier studies (Rummel
& Spada, 2005; Rummel et al., 2006) we know effective methods for enhancing collaboration that could be tailored
to support particularly collaborating experts.

         The results on the solution quality were mixed. In the medical ratings, contrary to our assumptions, no
significant differences could be found. However, as was noted, the medical disease described in the patient case
(multiple sclerosis) is a rather uncommon disease for general practitioners. One could imagine that when confronted
with such a complex symptom pattern in their daily work they would consult with a more specialized physician for
further steps. However, at least in Germany general practitioners usually are the first physician patients consult and
thus these physicians should be able to cope with complex and rare diseases at least in the beginning. Then, the
results for the planning of therapy steps might be explained by the fact that multiple sclerosis is an uncommon
disease, but   not experts'  low  performance    on   the diagnoses    and differential diagnoses.   On  these  variables  they
should   have  scored  higher   than student   dyads  and    trainee dyads as  diagnosing    is an  important competence    for
general  practitioners  in order  to find  the  right specialist  to consult.  As an  additional   explanation  of  the results,
consider  that in  most studies   on expertise   in medicine   experts    were less experienced    than  the expert physicians
examined    in our  study.   In the  study   of  Boshuizen    and  Schmidt   (1992)   experts   had  worked   four  years  after
graduation on average, while in our physicians had worked at least ten years after graduation. Perhaps, the longer
time span after graduation also causes experts from the medical domain to forget theoretical clinical knowledge as it
was found in our study on clinical psychology (Hauser et al., 2006). In general, therapy planning has been neglected
in the existing research on expertise in medicine (Norman et al., 2006) and should be focused on in future studies.

                                                               618                                                   CSCL 2007
         The results on the psychological ratings of the joint solutions were surprising. Contrary to our study in
expertise  development,     the   experts   formed   the  taillight   regarding   psychological   diagnoses,   and   differential
diagnoses.   We   had  assumed     that   experts  would    be  able   to    compensate    for potential  difficulties  in  their
communication     through   their high  experience   with patient   cases.   But  this hypothesis  was   not supported    by  our
results. Also in the planning of therapy steps, contrary to our assumptions no substantial differences between the
levels could   be found.    In  interpreting   these results  we    would    like to emphasize    once  more   that  the   expert
psychotherapists  participating    in  the  present  study   have     not undergone     a  postgraduate   professional  training
comparable to the one trainee therapists engage in today, because this was not obligatory until 1998 in Germany. In
other words, the above results might in part be due to our cross sectional design, i.e. an effect of differences among
cohorts.

         In explaining the results on the quality of the joint solution at large let us consider a thought we already
brought   up  in  the introduction.    Our    case study  was   designed      in  such  a  way   that combining   medical     and
psychotherapeutic   knowledge      was   required   to  come   to   a good    solution.   Therefore,  not only   the individual
knowledge    and  abilities of  the   interacting  partners,  but   also  the quality   of their  collaboration, during    which
knowledge resources were to be combined, played an important role. If the partners failed to pool their knowledge,
they could have arrived at poor solution even if they had had the prerequisites to do better.

         To sum up, our study showed that growing domain expertise can have negative effects on the net-based
collaboration among persons from different, yet related domains. For the outcome (the joint solution) the results
were mixed. As the outcome was influenced not only by the individual expertise of the collaborating partners, but
also by  the  quality of  their   collaboration,   providing  support    for the  collaborative  process  could  lead   to better
collaborative  solutions.   Further   studies  should  work   towards     developing   collaboration   support   tailored  to the
specific problems encountered at the expert level.

         In concluding, we would like to emphasize that in contrast to previous case studies on interdisciplinary
collaboration, with   the  present    study we  attempted   to  systematically    test hypotheses  derived   from   research  on
expertise development and computer-supported collaboration. Although net-based interdisciplinary collaboration is
a very complex area of research with many interwoven aspects, we are confident that further systematic empirical
research following this idea will yield more insights in this interesting and relevant field.

References
Boshuizen, H. (2003). Expertise development: how to bridge the gap between school and work. Den Haag: Cip-
         gegevens Koninklijke Bibliotheek.
Boshuizen, H. (2004). Does practice make perfect? In H. Boshuizen, R. Bromme & H. Gruber (Eds.), Professional
         learning: gaps and transitions on the way from novice to expert (pp. 73-93). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Boshuizen,   H.,  &   Schmidt,  H.    (1992).  On  the role  of biomedical    knowledge     in clinical reasoning    by experts,
         intermediates and novices. Cognitive Science, 16(2), 153-184.
Bromme, R. (1999). Beyond one's own perspective: The psychology of cognitive interdisciplinarity. In P. Weingart
         & N. Stehr (Eds.), Practising interdisciplinarity (pp. 115-133). Toronto: Toronto University Press.
Bromme,   R.,  Jucks,  R.,  &  Rambow,      R. (2004).   Experten-Laien-Kommunikation          im Wissensmanagement.       In  G.
         Reinmann & H. Mandl (Eds.), Psychologie des Wissensmanagements (pp. 176-188). Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Bromme, R., & Nückles, M. (1998). Perspective-taking between medical doctors and nurses. A study on multiple
         representations of different experts with common tasks. In M. W. van Someren, H. Boshuizen, T. de Jong
         & P. Reimann (Eds.), Learning with multiple representations (pp. 175-196). Oxford: Elsevier.
Caspar, F. (1993). Information processing in intake interviews: Interpretive and intuitive processes of cognitive-
         behaviorally  and   psychodynamically       oriented  therapists.   Paper  presented  at the  Annual  Meeting     of the
         Society for Psychotherapy Research, Pittsburgh, Penns.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S., E. (1991). Grounding in Communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.
         Teasley   (Eds.),  Perpectives     in socially  shared    cognition  (pp.   127-149).   Washington,   DC:    American
         Psychological Association.
Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. (1986). Mind over maschine. The power of human intuition and expertise in the era of
         the computer. New York: Free Press.
DeGroot, A.D. (1965). Thought and choice in chess. The Hague: Mouton.
Elstein, A.  S., Shulman,   L.    S., & Sprafka,   S.  A. (1978).     Medical    Problem   Solving -  An  Analysis   of Clinical
         Reasoning. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

                                                               619                                                     CSCL 2007
Epstein, S.  L.  (2005).   Making  interdisciplinary collaboration work.   In  S.   J. Derry, C.  D.  Schunn   &  M. A.
         Gernsbacher (Eds.), Interdisciplinary collaboration: an emerging cognitive science. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ericsson, K. A., Charness, N., Feltovich, P. J., & Hoffman, R. R. (2006). The Cambridge handbook of expertise and
         expert performance. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Feltovich, P. J., Prietula, M. J., & Ericsson, K. A. (2006). Studies of expertise from psychological perspectives. In
         K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. Feltovich, R. R. Hoffman (Eds). The Cambridge handbook of expertise
         and expert performance. (p. 41-67). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hauser, S., Spada, H., Rummel, N., & Meier, A. (2006). Expertise development in clinical psychology. In R. Sun,
         N. Miyake & C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
         Society. (pp. 1458-1463). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Heckhausen,   H., &  Gollwitzer,   P.M.  (1987). Thought     contents  and cognitive    functioning  in motivational vs.
         volitional states of mind. Motivation & Emotion, 11, 101-120.
Hermann,    F., Rummel,     N., &   Spada,  H.  (2001).   Solving  the  case   together:  The  challenge   of  net-based
         interdisciplinary collaboration. In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings & K. Hakkarainen (Eds.), Proceedings of
         the First European Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. (pp. 293-300). Maastricht:
         McLuhan Institute.
Hinds, P. J. (1999). The curse of expertise: The effects of expertise and debiasing methods on prediction of novice
         performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 5(2), 205-221.
Hinds, P. J., Patterson, M., & Pfeffer, J. (2001). Bothered by abstraction: The effect of expertise on knowledge
         transfer and subsequent novice performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(6), 1232-1243.
Lay, K.,  &  Spada,   H.   (2000). Erwerb   und  Anwendung      domänenspezifischen      Wissens: Eine   psychologische
         Perspektive. In R. Duit & C. v. Rhöneck (Eds.), Ergebnisse fachdidaktischer und psychologischer Lehr-
         Lernforschung. Beiträge zu einem Workshop an der Pädagogischen Hochschule Ludwigsburg (pp. 17-34).
         Kiel: IPN-Schriftenreihe.
Köhler, T., & Trimpop, R. (2004). Sehen und gesehen werden: Teleradiologie mittels Desktop- Videoconferencing.
         In W. Bungard, B. Koop & C. Liebig (Eds.), Proceedings zur 3. Tagung der Fachgruppe Arbeits- und
         Organisationspsychologie. München: Rainer Hampp.
McDaniel,    S.  H. (1995).     Collaboration between    psychologists    and  family    physicians: Implementing    the
         biopsychosocial model. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26(2), 117-122.
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (in press). A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
         collaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning.
Norman, G., Eva, K., Brooks, L. R., & Hamstra, S. (2006). Expertise in medicine and surgery. In K. A. Ericsson, N.
         Charness,  P.  J. Feltovich &  R. R.  Hoffman    (Eds.), The  Cambridge    handbook   of   expertise and expert
         performance (pp. 339-353). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ploetzner, R., & Spada, H. (1993). Multiple mental representations of information in physics problem solving. In G.
         Strube & K. F. Wender (Eds.), The cognitive psychology of knowledge (pp. 285-312). Amsterdam: Elsevier
         Science Publishers.
Rikers, R. M. J. P., Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (2002). On the Constraints of Encapsulated Knowledge:
         Clinical Case Representations by Medical Experts and Subexperts. Cognition and Instruction, 20(1), 27-45.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to Collaborate: An Instructional Approach to Promoting Collaborative
         Problem Solving in Computer-Mediated Settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Rummel, N., Spada, H., & Hauser, S. (2006). Learning to collaborate in a computer-mediated setting: Observing a
         model beats learning from being scripted. In S. A. Barab, K. E. Hay & D. T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of
         the Seventh   International Conference  of  the Learning   Sciences   (pp. 634-640).  Mahwah,    NJ:  Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.

Acknowledgements
The present research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; [German Science Foundation])
with project grants  to  Hans   Spada  and Franz  Caspar   (Sp  251/16-2   and 16-3).   We  thank   our student research
assistants Christine Kalweit, Ann-Kristin Reinhold, and Britta Stumpf for their help in data collection and analysis.
Furthermore, we would like to acknowledge Katrin Wenning and Katrin Manner, our psychological and medical
experts for their help in material development and ratings of joint solutions. Moreover, we would like to thank Anne
Meier, who   has  made   a substantial contribution  to this project: the rating scheme   for the collaborative  process
analysis was largely developed as part of her thesis work.

                                                           620                                                  CSCL 2007
