 Tools of Play: Coordinating Games, Characters, and Actions While
                                     Learning to Play Video Games
            Tom Satwicz, University of Georgia, 611 Aderhold Hall, Athens, GA 30605, tsatwicz@uga.edu
        Reed Stevens, University of Washington, Box 353600, Seattle, WA 98195, reedstev@u.washington.edu

         Abstract:    This  paper    describes   an  individual's   role in  coordinating   a distributed system    for
         learning. The analysis deals with a core issue for CSCL; the mismatch between common measures
         for learning, which are based on individual traits and outcomes, and learning processes that are
         distributed across people and artifacts. Rather than bridge this mismatch through an assessment of
         group performance, we suggest that learning scientists consider assessing an individual's adaptive
         reorganization in a socio-technical system. We selected video game play as a context for looking
         at collaborative learning because it represents an emergent social activity young people commonly
         engage  in.   Additionally,   recent   claims   that game   play   involves   deep   learning have  not  been
         thoroughly investigated with ethnographic research; this project begins to address that gap.

Introduction: Game play as collaborative learning
         Empirical research on collaborative learning tends to rely on the traits and outcomes of individuals with the
consequence that the accuracy of the collaborative learning process is not well accounted for (Barron, 2003; Stahl,
Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006; Stevens, 2000). Although members of the CSCL community have long argued that
learning occurs across people and artifacts, assessments still tend to focus on individuals. Broadly speaking studies of
activity that take a distributed, cultural-historical, or situated perspective articulate a tension between an individual's
agency and the context (Billett, 2006; Latour, 1996). In other words, for the field there is a great deal more to know
about how individual agency operates in relation to the broader socio-technical system. Here we approach this issue
by looking at an individual's role in naturally occurring instances of collaborative game play. Through a descriptive
analysis we argue that the individual's agency plays a role in creating a suitable context for collaborative learning.
From    the analysis  we    suggest  that   one  way   to  think   about  how    to  account  for  learning in  the context    of
collaboration is to look at an individual's coordination of resources, specifically tools. By looking at how individuals
coordinate tools we forefront the collaborative process, yet at the same time account for the individual's role.

Data sources and methods of analysis
         The  data   we present   here comes    from a  six-month   ethnographic    study of  young    people's game  play. The
study was conducted as part of a broader effort to understand how people learn across settings such as school, work,
and home (Bransford et al., 2006; Stevens, 2000; Stevens & Hall, 1998; Stevens, Wineburg, Herrenkohl, & Bell,
2005). Our decision to study game play extended beyond a specific interest in games themselves. Rather game play
was studied because it is how many young people choose to spend their time. Therefore, we find it is important for
learning scientists,  seeking to  understand    learning across a   range of settings, to investigate  this pervasive   aspect of
young people's lives. Consequently, we use the player rather than the game as the unit of analysis.

         Game   play   lends  itself well   for looking  at naturally occurring     instances of  collaborative learning. Video
games have been held up as holding a promising future for education and the learning sciences (Gee, 2003; Squire &
Barab, 2004), however little is known about what young people do while playing video games. The lack of detailed
descriptions of game play has contributed in part to divisive debate on whether games are good or bad, rather than a
conversation about how young people learn and use video games in their everyday lives. Additionally, many game
systems  are designed   for use in   social settings (i.e. the family    living room)  and  come  with  multiple  controllers  to
encourage use by many people at one time. At the same time, collaboration is not assigned but an emergent activity.

         We visited eight participants on a weekly basis in their own homes for six-months. The specific population
was chosen to represent a range in age (9-15), gender (4 boys and 4 girls), social configuration (2 sets of siblings,
some    participants played  with  friends  while   others  played  alone), and  the type  of  games   played.  The participants
selected and played their own games on their own systems, allowing for naturally occurring conditions during field
visits. While  the   participants played,   we  video  recorded  activity that   occurred in  the room  where   the participants
played  along with   activity that   was taking   place  on the  game    screen. Later we   synchronized  the  two  images, `in-

                                                                629                                                   CSCL 2007
room' and    `in-game',  into   a single  file.   We  then  content    logged   the  videos   (totaling over   100  hours)   with  written
descriptions of activity across the game and the room. To address specific research questions we used the descriptive
content  logs to  build cases,    such   as the   one presented   below.    The    benefit of   having  both   the  in-game  and  in-room
recordings is that a "separate worlds" view of game play is avoided (Stevens, Satwicz, & McCarthy, in press). The
separate worlds view holds that games exist apart or separate from other aspects of the players' lives and can lead to
an inaccurate picture of how games are learned and their impact young people's lives.

         Here    we  present  the    play   of one    individual  involved      in the  study   as   a case  of   collaborative   learning.
"Johnny" was 13 years old when the study took place. He enrolled in the study with his older brother "Mikey" (age
15) and on several occasions (as the analysis shows) the two boys played together. Johnny and Mikey also have a
younger  sister, "Maddy"      (age   8), who   played   with  them   and    observed    their  play  on   a few   instances. Johnny    was
selected for  this   particular   analysis  because    his   play occurred      in a   setting  that   involved   a great deal    of social
interaction. Johnny    also worked    through     a  defined series  of  challenges    in  a particular   game  during   the study   period
allowing for a view of progression in-game that can uncover the collaborative learning process.

Coordinating a distributed socio-technical system for collaborative learning and play
         This    analysis   illustrates   how     Johnny    gathers    a system     for   collaborative     learning.  He does    this  by
coordinating people, games, characters, and actions into a tool kit for playing games. Coordination is used as means
to understand    the assembly   of   people,   media,   and  knowledge      for learning   and  accomplishing      tasks (diSessa,   1991;
Hutchins, 1995; Stevens & Hall, 1998).

         The  analysis    includes   instances    that  can  be   seen as   collaborative    learning;  they   involve   multiple    people
developing   shared  meaning      while  working     together  on  a   common      problem     (Stahl  et al., 2006).   Here   learning is
taken as "adaptive reorganization in a complex system" (Hutchins, 1995, p. 289). We use this particular definition to
frame the   analysis  because     it does   not   presume    learning    as a process     relegated    only to  cognitive  activity;  "the
relevant complex      system    includes    a  web   of coordination      among     media     and  processes    inside   and outside   the
individual task performers" (Hutchins, 1995, p. 289). As a concept then, the complex system, or socio-technical
system, is useful when considering how young people interact with video games and other media that make up the
context in which games are played. In addition, we take a distributed view of collaboration, where activity is seen as
distributed across people and material objects (Becker, 1982; Hutchins, 1995; Latour, 1996; Pea, 1993).

         In the following analysis we describe Johnny's development of a `tool kit' for accomplishing tasks in video
games:

         [T]he term `tool' refer[s] to not only tools in the traditional sense, e.g., objects like hammers, but
         more generally any socially constituted structure used to accomplish a particular task, including
         documents     and    standardized     work    practices.   `Tool     kit' refers    to the    ensemble    of  materials
         deployed for the accomplishment of a particular task. (Goodwin & Goodwin, 1998, p. 91)

Our analysis looks specifically at three tools present in Johnny's play: `games', `characters', and `actions.' Game is
used consistently    with its everyday      meaning;    it refers to the    media  purchased    and  played    on  the computer   system.
Characters   are agents  in the   game,     controlled  either  by   the player    or  the computer,    upon    which    activity is  often
centered. Actions refer to commands the player gives to the machine for use towards some outcome in the game.

Johnny's tools for play: games, characters, and actions
         Take the following organizational setup, present during a field visit, as an example of how people, games,
characters,  and actions  are   coordinated    in a  socio-technical   system      for collaboration.   Throughout     most  of   the visit
Johnny sat on the couch in the family's living room with his older brother, Mikey, and his younger sister, Maddy.
They  played  three   games   during     the   visit across  two   different    game    systems.    Some    of  the   games  were    played
concurrently  or  discussed   while   another   game    was  being   played.    Concurrent      play was    possible   because two    game
systems were present: a console game system played on the family's TV screen and a handheld game system.

         The  visit   started and    Mikey    was   playing  Dragon      Ball Z    Budokai    Tenkaichi   on   the  PlayStation   2, while
Johnny was playing a Mario Brothers game on the Nintendo DS handheld game system. After about 18 minutes of
play, the two boys switched games. It is here that we can see how labor is divided in the context of their play. At

                                                                   630                                                          CSCL 2007
this particular  moment,    Johnny was    returning  to  the room   after having   left to check  on   dinner.  Mikey   was
attempting  to  get past  a particular challenge in  the Dragon    Ball Z game,   where   he had  to stay alive in a battle
against the character Majin Buu until the counter on the screen ran out.

Segment 1
     1.  ((Johnny runs into the room.))
     2.  Johnny: She got an all meat pizza ] but it wasn't baked yet.
     3.  Mikey:                             [ Oh! This guy is hard.
     4.  ((Johnny takes the controller from Mikey.))
     5.  Johnny: Majin Buu, can I try?
     6.  Mikey: yeah, I can't survive two minutes.
     7.  Maddy: he's too tough=
     8.  Mikey: =now if it was my job to beat him I might be able to do it.
     9.  Johnny: um ya know that place I couldn't get to earlier?
     10. ((Johnny reaches into the couch and pulls up his Nintendo DS and hands it to Mikey.))
     11. Johnny: Well it's now open and I'm in it. So run back get the red um, box. Float up, get the red coin on one
         of the windowsill thingies.
     12. Mikey: What are you talking about Johnny?
     13. Johnny: There's a red box. ((Johnny turns to look at the Nintendo DS screen in Mikey's hand.)) That!
     14. ((Johnny turns to look at the TV screen, which is still loading the game.))
     15. Johnny: And the reason he's got Wario's voice is because I'm Wario with Mario's head on. (2 sec.) So just=
     16. Mikey: =you just float up here?
     17. ((Johnny turns to look at the Nintendo DS screen in Mikey's hands.))
     18. Johnny: Float over there.
     19. Mikey: [(inaudible)
     20. Johnny: ]no float more more
     21. ((Johnny turns to look back at the TV screen which is now playing an introduction to the battle Johnny will
         face.))
[Johnny and Mikey 2006-January-06_00:17:38.27]

         At this moment Johnny and Mikey coordinated the available tool kit for accomplishing tasks in the two
games they were playing. The coordination was preceded by Mikey's comment, "Oh! This guy is hard" (Segment 1
line 3), a statement that indicates he had assessed his own progress a specific task. Johnny then made a bid to take
on the task, "Majin Buu, can I try?" (Segment 1 line 5). Johnny included a clarifying question by leading his bid
with the name of the character Mikey was attempting to defeat, Majin Buu. The character, to be defeated, then was a
part of the tool kit Johnny and Mikey used for defining tasks in the context of play. Mikey agreed to the change by
handing over the controller and giving an affirmative verbal response (Segment 1 lines 4 and 6). In this exchange the
controller signified who was responsible for the defined task and so it is not only a tool for controlling the game, but
an organizational device for marking roles in the room. Mikey also described the parameters of the task at hand--
survive two minutes (Segment 1 lines 5-7).

         Johnny, though, did not leave Mikey empty handed and literally gave him the Nintendo DS along with a
task to complete in the game (Segment 1 lines 9-21). The explanation of the task, however, took several turns and
the use of additional tools. Johnny initially described the task with information on where in the game he had been;
"ya know that place I couldn't get to earlier?" (Segment T line 9) and "I'm Wario with Mario's head" (Segment 1
line 15). The game characters, Wario and Mario, were used as tools to describe the task. Additionally, actions in the
game were used as tools to define the parameters of the task. This occurred when Johnny told Mikey "run back get
the  red um, box.   Float up, get  the  red coin  on one  of  the  windowsill   thingies" (Segment   1 line  11). Johnny's
explanation  included  several actions  in  the  game:  run, float up,  and get the red   coin. Mikey  however    requested
additional information   (Segment  1   line 12), which   Johnny  responded   to by  using  Mikey's   current actions in the
game (Segment 1 lines 13 ­ 21).

         We chose the particular moment transcribed in Segment 1 to illustrate the tool kit that had been coordinated
in Johnny's socio-technical system for play. An obvious element of the system is his brother Mikey, who Johnny has
enrolled into both his Mario Brothers and Dragon Ball Z games. The two games played at this moment constitute
one type of tool in the distributed system; as seen in the information Johnny passed onto Mikey each game has a

                                                             631                                                  CSCL 2007
particular local history of play. A second type of tool are the game characters and the degree to which they define
play in the game   by  creating task parameters    and  are employed   to complete    those tasks. A   third type of tool  is
actions in the game used to accomplish specific tasks.

         Near  the end of same   the field  visit  another person  was enrolled  into the  socio-technical   system. At   the
moment,    Johnny  was playing  the  Mario   Brothers   game   on the  handheld system  and  Mikey   and  Maddy   were  still
playing Dragon Ball Z Budokai Tenkaichi. The phone rang and Johnny's mother brought it to him. On the line was
a friend of Johnny's. His mother's description of the activity that was about to ensue was accurate: "They play video
games while talking about video games on the phone." [Johnny and Mikey 2006-January-06_01:27:58.29]

         Mikey grabbed Johnny's attention during the phone conversation to point out something on the television
screen. Johnny then mentioned to his friend that Mikey was playing Dragon Ball Z to acquire characters to play with
later (see Segment 2).

Segment 2
     1.  ((Mikey and Maddy are in between battles in the Dragon Ball Z game. Mikey points to the screen and gets
         Johnny's  attention. Johnny   is playing   the Nintendo   DS  and  on  the phone   with a friend discussing  video
         games.))
     2.  Johnny:   ((Talking to his  friend on the  phone.)) Woah.    Mikey  is helping  me  with  um   the  Dragon  Ball  Z
         that I got for Christmas and he got me Kid Trunks and all these characters, it's so awesome.
[Johnny and Mikey 2006-January-06_01:29:12.18]

Johnny's   comment  can   be  taken as a   partial description of  the activity in  the room,    which  included  collecting
characters in Dragon   Ball  Z. Collecting   characters  or items  in games  is generally   done by  completing   levels  or
challenges. In this case, Mikey was working through a series of battles set within a storyline that encompasses the
Dragon   Ball  Z  game.  Johnny's    comment,     that Mikey   got him   "Kid   Trunks  and  all these  characters,  it's so
awesome", can be taken as a reference to game characters as a part of a tool kit for play.

         At the particular moment, while Johnny was on the phone, at least three other people were a part of the
socio-technical system in which he played. His brother Mikey was hard at work, throughout the entire field visit,
collecting characters for future play. On the phone was a friend with whom Johnny consulted by sharing knowledge
of the games he was playing. His sister Maddy was being apprenticed into the system by acting in a peripheral role
to the overall effort in Dragon Ball Z (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Stevens et al., in press). Although each person was
there to play, they each had a role in adding more game characters and actions to the socio-technical system. By
adding characters and actions, the tool kit at their disposal became better equipped for completing a range of tasks.

         Within  Johnny's   social  group,  access  to certain tools,  such as  actions in  particular games,  is assumed.
Johnny and Mikey described the assumed tool kit in response to a hypothetical question we posed about a friend that
needed help with some of the games that Johnny liked to play (see Segment 3).

Segment 3-1
     1.  Tom: What about you Johnny? Pick out one of your favorite games here, uh maybe the Tony Hawk, was
         that, you said one of your fav-- Or the Dragon Ball Z?
     2.  Johnny: yeah
     3.  Tom: If somebody came to you and said ya know, 'I just got it.' Let's say your friend just got it at school or
         something like that=

Johnny disputed the situation as we framed it and remarked that no one would ask for help on Dragon Ball Z (see
Segment 3-2 line 4), the game Mikey was helping him with in Segments 1 and 2. He contended that "everyone's
already an expert at it" (Segment 3-2 line 6) because five Dragon Ball Z games existed prior to the one we asked
about. Johnny then likened our question to an older more culturally established game, Pac-Man.

Segment 3-2
     4.  Johnny: =ah, nobody would ask for help on Dragon Ball Z though.
     5.  Tom: Why is that?
     6.  Johnny: I don't know, cause there's already been five games and everyone's already an expert at it.

                                                             632                                                  CSCL 2007
    7.  Tom: mmhum
    8.  Johnny: And it would be sort of weird. It would be like saying, 'how do you play Pac Man?'
    9.  Tom: hum
    10. Mikey: yeah, it's=
    11. Tom: =it's that basic?
    12. Mikey: Yeah, really basic fighting game.

The assumed tool kit Johnny and Mikey described includes button sequences, which are used to create actions in the
game (Segment 3-3). Mikey held up an older game controller and pointed out how these actions remain consistent,
to some degree, across games and gaming systems through conventions built physically into the controllers. Across
game systems, controllers take a similar form or in Mikey's words; "every system has this general idea on the right
side, it's got a square turned that way." In the case of the game Mikey was describing, each button corresponds to a
certain skateboarding action in the game. This indicates that there is an inertia built into the socio-technical system
that makes taking up new games easy (Becker, 1995).

Segment 3-3
    13. Tom: What about Tony Hawk? Is that the same way?
    14. Mikey: [ uh Tony Hawk is
    15. Johnny: ] It's the same for every system and that one's had twelve games for different systems.
    16. Mikey: yeah,   cause every system has this general idea on the right side, it's got a square   turned that way
        ((Mikey holds up a Super Nintendo controller and points to the four buttons arranged in a square on its
        right side.)) and this is grid, this is jump, this is special, and this is another special ((Mikey pushes each of
        the four buttons while he explains what they do in the game.)) And eh- everyone's played a Tony Hawk
        game   once in their life and   you've played   one, you've played  'em   all. The only thing that improves is
        gameplay and graphics but controls stay the same.

Johnny described how the button sequence used to create an action could change from game to game in the same
series. His explanation shows that he had committed to memory two specific sequences to use a "super attack" in the
Dragon Ball Z games (Segment 3-4 lines 21 and 23). Each of these button sequences is a part of his gaming tool kit.

Segment 3-4
    17. Tom: Controls stay the same, is that true across a lot of games you think or?
    18. Mikey: uh, [no
    19. Johnny:    ] no because on the original Dragon Ball Z Budokai game
    20. Tom: mhum
    21. Johnny: it was a side scroller  and it was just a basic fighting game like Tekken, so you had to do punch
        punch punch punch then energy to do a super attack.
    22. Tom: unhun
    23. Johnny: but on this one you only have to power up for a few seconds and hold L-one and then triangle to do
        the super attack.
    24. Mikey: yep
[Johnny and Mikey 2006-January-12_00:05:46.12]

Learning to use new tools
        Johnny, like many players faced numerous choices within the play of each game. One of the more recurrent
activities across games is the selection of a character for use in the game. In Segment 4 Johnny selected a character
for use in the game Super Smash Brothers Melee (SSBM). At this particular moment he was playing what is called
the "events  mode"  where  there  are a series of fifty scripted challenges on  which    a player can work  over time.
Throughout the six-month study Johnny returned to this portion of the game several times and worked to complete
nearly all of the events. The  transcript below   shows  that on  one occasion  Johnny    asked for information on the
characters to complete the challenge he had selected.

Segment 4
    1.  ((Johnny  has just completed  an  event in SSBM. As it finishes he  says, "Yes, another one done"))
    2.  Tom: you're rolling today, hun?
    3.  Johnny: yeah. Trophy Tussle three. (2 sec.) ((reading from the screen)) here's your shot for ma-joria's mask.

                                                          633                                                  CSCL 2007
    4.     ((Selects "Lv. 47. Trophy Tussle 3" and a screen comes up where he must select a character to use in the
           challenge.))
    5.     Johnny: hmmm, who can take down many people?
    6.     ((Selects the character Ness and begins to work on the event.))
[Johnny and Mikey 2005-November-17_01:18:38.13]

           Segment   4  began   just after Johnny   had  completed  one event and    was in  the  process  of moving    to another
yet uncompleted event (Segment 4 lines 1-4). After selecting an event, he had to choose a character from a group of
25. While   he was    making    his  selection Johnny  verbally  indicated a quality in  the character he  was    looking  for, the
ability to "take down many people" (Segment 4 line 5). The twist in this particular instance is that Johnny and the
researcher were the only two people in the room. While Johnny did on occasion ask for assistance with games from
the researcher, it   usually    took the  form  of  asking if he noticed something    that  had   happened    in the game   or  had
access  to particular  resources    (such  as the Internet). In general the  researcher  made  it a rule   to not offer any  help.
Additionally,   Johnny's     intonations   and body   positioning   would   indicate he  did  not   direct his   comment    to  the
researcher. From this it is inferred that Johnny's request is not to another person, but to himself.

           Soon after the moment in Segment 4, Johnny successfully beat the event, something he was unable to do
several months      earlier indicating that   Johnny  had  made  some   progress in  the game.    The  question   he asked  while
choosing his character was, however, not new and was present during an earlier field visit where Johnny collaborated
with his brother Mikey on the same event. On the first attempt the two boys tried for fourteen minutes and eighteen
different attempts and were unable to beat the event. In comparison, Johnny beat the same event in two attempts and
two and a half minutes after the moment transcribed in Segment 4. Between the two attempts Johnny changed his
character  selection. In    the instance  transcribed in Segment  5, Johnny   and Mikey     attempted  to  learn  how   to use  the
character, Jigglypuff, to beat the same event Johnny successfully completed two months later.

Segment 5-1
    1.     Mikey: whoa. (3 sec) I think I'll just stay up here while he's invincible.
    2.     ((Jigglypuff is floating up at the top of the screen.))
    3.     Johnny: you only have five jumps and then you're-
    4.     (13 sec.)

In  Segment   5-1    Mikey   and  Johnny    had   a short  exchange  about   how  to  use  the   character  Jigglypuff.   Mikey's
suggestion was that he would use a particular action, jump, to float on the top of the screen. Johnny then pointed out
to him that there are a limited number of jumps that he can use. This short moment points to some variance in how
this particular tool, the character Jigglypuff, can be used. As the segment went on, Mikey continued to struggle and
asked Johnny for help (Segment 5-2 line 9). The play in this instance also indicates that assigned expertise changes
between the boys (Stevens, 2000).

Segment 5-2
    5.     Mikey: Jigglypuff needs a brick move.
    6.     (23 sec.)
    7.     Mikey: This totally stinks they keep putting shells right in the middle.
    8.     (6 sec.)
    9.     Mikey: why isn't it working.
    10.    (4 sec.)
    11.    ((Mikey pauses the game.))
    12.    Johnny: Mikey.
    13.    Mikey: press Z.
    14.    ((Mikey gets a "failure". The game screen returns to the events menu. The same event is selected; Johnny is
           now controlling the action on the screen.))
    15.    Mikey: It just doesn't work.
    16.    Johnny: That's because you weren't doing the right moves.
    17.    Mikey: Yeah I was=
    18.    Johnny: =Mikey you were only doing down B. She's got more moves than down B.
[Johnny and Mikey 2005-September-16_00:05:17.07]

                                                                634                                                     CSCL 2007
After Mikey     asked why   Jigglypuff   was    not working   Johnny   responded   that he  was  not  "doing     the right  moves"
(Segment 5-2 line 15). Johnny's response points to a particular set of actions, these so-called "right moves", that are
used with the character Jigglypuff. His use of the phrase "right moves" implies that there are also a set of `wrong
moves' that should be avoided. These actions (the "right moves") are a part of the tool kit Johnny has amassed for
playing in the gaming context. Segment 6, which occurred just prior to Segment 5 is an example of how the actions
of a character were discussed. Mikey had suggested that with Jigglypuff he would be able to kill all of the other
characters  with  one  hit, which    would   have   helped them   meet    the event's objective   (Segment    6  line  2).  Johnny
disagreed,  and  contended     that the  other  characters would   "wake   up  too fast"   and  Mikey   countered    his point   by
providing a strategy for using the action (Segment 6 lines 3 and 4). In instances such as this the tools in-hand for the
players--characters   and   actions--were    discussed  in  relation   to their utility for   particular  tasks   leading    to the
development of knowledge for using the tools.

Segment 6
     1.  ((A battle begins on the screen. Johnny is controlling a character on the screen and fighting a computer
         controlled character.))
     2.  Mikey:   I  need   to do   that Majora's   Mask   one   cause  I know   how    to kill everybody     in one   hit. (2  sec)
         Jigglypuff! (singing)
     3.  Johnny: They wake up too fast=
     4.  Mikey: =No you don't even need to make 'em sleep you just get right in the middle of all of 'em and you'll
         kill at least one with a sleepy attack.
     5.  ((Johnny switches the game back to the events menu screen.))
[Johnny and Mikey 2005-September-16_00:02:26.11]

         Johnny and Mikey's attempt to beat the Trophy Tussle 3 event, partially transcribed in Segment 5, included
the development of an action, Jigglypuff's sleepy attack, for the purpose of completing the event. The development
of this in-game action between the two boys occurred early in the study as well. What follows in Segment 7 is an
instance of play in which Johnny attempted to explain to Mikey how to use this action while they competed against
each  other in  a multiplayer    mode    of  the  game  SSBM.      Notice  that development      of  an in-game      action  was  a
collaborative in-room activity despite the fact that they were playing against each other. This shows one of the ways
that unmandated collaborations emerge, through the development of a tool kit for accomplishing tasks.

Segment 7-1
     1. ((Johnny, Mikey,    and  their   sister Maddy  are in  a battle against each  other   in the game     SSBM.    Jigglypuff,
         Mikey's character, spins, lets out a bright flash and is thrown back.))
     2. Johnny: Mikey you don't even know how to use it.
     3. (8 sec)
     4. ((Jigglypuff, Mikey's character, again spins on the ground, but is thrown across the screen by Zelda, Maddy's
         character.))
     5. Mikey: Ok, yeah it's official- it's official I don't know how to use Jigglypuff.
     6. Johnny: You just hold 'B' and release it. (4 sec.) ((Jiggypuff spins on the ground.)) now release it.
     7. Mikey: No I wanted to see her say--

Mikey   attempted   to use  Jigglypuff's    sleepy  attack and   was   unsuccessful   (Segment    7-1   lines 1-7).  Immediately
following   Mikey's    try  Johnny   gave   him   specific instructions   in  coordination   with   the activity    on the   screen
(Segment   7-1  line  7).  The  sequence    points  to the coordination    of  two tools,   a   character and    an  action, in  an
instructional moment.

Segment 7-2
     8. ((The battle continues for about 40 seconds.))
     9.  Mikey:  ((Jigglypuff   spins    on the  ground.))  is that how    you  do it?  ((Peach,    Johnny's   character,   knocks
         Jigglypuff off the screen.)) no that is apparently not how you do it.
     10. Johnny: Mikey you just hold 'B' in and release it. ((Jiggiypuff spins on the ground starts flashing and Zelda
         flies off the screen.))(3 sec) there you go.
     11. Mikey: ohhh

                                                               635                                                       CSCL 2007
    12.   Johnny: yeah, who would have ever figured out that
[Johnny and Mikey 2005-July-14_00:48:50.01]

The instructional sequence transcribed in Segment 7 ended with Mikey successfully completing Jigglypuff's sleepy
attack. The instance is a glimpse into how characters and actions become tools for use in the play of video games.
Particular tasks not only require a tool kit that contains the right characters and actions, but knowledge of how to use
the tools.  Although  Mikey   and Johnny        were  competing   against each   other at the particular moment   they  both
collaborated in building the socio-technical system. By helping Mikey develop as a player, the tool kit Johnny used
for playing games was distributed across multiple people.

The collaborative development of a new tool
          Johnny also worked collaboratively with players other than Mikey when developing his set of actions. On a
different date Johnny and  a friend, Evan,      developed an action  in the game,   Teenage  Mutant   Ninja Turtles 2: Battle
Nexus [Johnny    and Mikey   2005-August-19].        The  action was developed   to solve  a specific problem the   two boys
were having. During the course of their play Johnny and Evan were given a challenge by the game in text; "Take
Fugitoid to a secure place. Just pick it up and carry it with you. It won't be a nuisance that way. There's a way out
from the rear of the back street." Johnny and Evan struggled with this task because they were unable to figure out
how to pick up Fugitoid as the directions indicated. The struggle was the result of a missing action in their tool kit.

          While figuring out how to carry Fugitoid the boys introduced a variety of actions into the socio-technical
system. These actions include: moving forward without Fugitoid, pushing Fugitoid, and throwing Fugitoid. Some of
the actions partially worked but none of them lead to a successful completion of the task. Johnny and Evan also
attempted to introduce resources external to the game into the system to help figure out how to pick up Fugitoid.
These resources   included:  the researcher       as a knowledge    source,  the Internet, and  a guidebook.   None    of the
resources were immediately available so the boys continued on without them. Eventually Johnny threw Fugitoid in
what might be considered an "accident" or "random" occurrence, however at the moment Johnny was going through
the possible button combinations. These combinations are limited by the physical nature of the controller.

Segment 8
    1. ((Johnny's character moves away from Fugitoid and Evan's moves in closer.))
    2. Evan: Did you press all the buttons?
    3. Johnny: ye:::s. I tried every single combination of buttons
    4. ((Johnny is pushing systematically through the buttons on the controller. His character is at the front of the
          screen and responds to each of the button combinations.))
    5. Johnny: (2 sec.) wait I thought I- (4 sec.) darn I thought that was grab (4 sec.) I had it for a second.
    6. Evan: what? pick up=
    7. ((Johnny's character bends down slightly as though he is going to pick something up.))
    8. Johnny: =there!
    9. Evan: what is that?
    10.   ((Johnny's character moves towards Fugitoid and picks him up briefly, flipping Fugitoid over his back.))
    11.   Evan: Oh you flipped him. How'd you do that?
    12.   ((Johnny's character picks up Fugitoid and carries him on his back.))
    13.   Evan: Yes. How'd you do it?
    14.   ((Johnny's character throws Fugitoid over a ledge towards their final destination.))
    15.   Evan: There we go, how'd you=
    16.   ((Johnny pauses the game.))
    17.   Johnny: You hold L and press B or A I can't remember
    18.   Evan: ok hold on, let me try.
    19.   ((Johnny's character flips Fugitoid over his back.))
    20.   Evan: Hold L=
    21.   Johnny: =push A
    22.   Evan: I'll do it I'll do it (3 sec.)
    23.   ((Evan's character is next to Fugitoid, but he is not picking him up.))
    24.   Evan: I can't do mine
    25.   Johnny: Hold L- get out of the way.

                                                               636                                                  CSCL 2007
    26.   Evan: maybe it's B (inaudible) I'm not gonna be able to do it.
    27.   ((Evan's character goes up to fight the attackers. Johnny's character goes and picks up Fugitoid.))
    28.   Johnny: R
    29.   Evan: R? R and what?
    30.   Johnny: R and B
    31.   Evan: 'k just=
    32.   Johnny: =I'm carrying him
    33.   Evan: just keep walkin. pick him up again. I'll protect you.
[Johnny and Mikey 2005-August-19_00:25:27.09]

          In Segment 8 there are several relevant moments to the development of the tool kit used in their game play.
Lines 1-9 include Johnny's attempt to systematically find a new action, ending with the recognition that something
significant had happened; "there!" After Johnny and Evan recognized that a new action could be used to accomplish
the task they refined it (Segment 8 lines 10 ­ 27) and committed the button sequence to memory (Segment 8 lines 28
­ 33). In this particular instance Johnny and Evan learned a new action by using their existing tool set, including the
inertia present in the conventions of the controller. They then coordinated the action with other aspects of the socio-
technical system to accomplish an emergent task.

Discussion
          The analysis  here looks  across  Johnny's  play  to understand  how one  accomplishes    the   work   of playing a
video game. Johnny's play includes the development and coordination of tools for use in a socio-technical system.
The tools are means by which he interacts with the game to accomplish a set of emergent tasks. Johnny's success in
solving game    tasks  is a  result of his   adaptive  reorganization  in  the socio-technical  system      over time.   This
description of collaborative learning  is  a case  of tool coordination--games,   characters, and  actions--for     use across
people within the system. The descriptions are useful for thinking about how to understand an individual's role in a
collaborative effort.

          Learners like Johnny adaptively reorganize tools in the system by bringing multiple disparate elements into
coordination  (Stevens   &  Hall,  1998). In  this case,  Johnny  expanded   his  tool kit and developed     the knowledge
required to use the new additions. This reorganization occurred across both people and artifacts. Some of the actions
Johnny committed to memory, while characters remained saved in the game system. What should be recognized is
that in many of the instances there was an emergent self-assessment of the tool kit that led to a reorganization of the
system. Johnny and his collaborators looked at what was and was not working. They also took feedback from the
game system and each other. For example, take the instance above in Segment 1 when Johnny and Mikey switched
games. At that moment, Mikey's comment, that the task was difficult, set the stage for a reorganization in which
Johnny took over one task while handing another over to Mikey.

          Learning as reorganization in a socio-technical system has potential if we can document instances where
tools are developed in the pursuit of tasks meaningful to the learner. It is easy see the activity Johnny was engaged
in as a   non-consequential    despite the   ubiquity  of   game  play.  However,   his    coordination   of  tools  towards
accomplishing specific tasks is remarkable. It involves a network of people whose assigned expertise changes on a
moment-to-moment basis (Stevens, 2000). The coordination makes use of an inertia (Becker, 1995) built into the
media and other objects; however, players such as Johnny create their own tools for working within this system.
Tasks emerge from use of the tool kit, rather than an externally mandated source. Additionally, the collaboration
was not mandated, rather it was a function of how tools were coordinated to accomplish the emergent tasks.

          This  suggests  that accounts   of learning  in  collaborative settings might    benefit from   a component     that
evaluates an   individual's  reorganization  of  the  socio-technical  system. This    echoes  some    of the   ideas   behind
Preparation for Future   Learning   assessments,   where  the focus is not whether  an  individual  is able  to  immediately
solve a problem in a new setting but on how well the individual is prepared to learn how to solve new problems
(Bransford  &  Schwartz,    1999).  However   rather  than focus explicitly on   cognitive processes   inside   the head, the
description above indicates that the development tool kit is an aspect of how one learns in a collaborative setting.

          One point that should not get lost here is that the learning in these instances is not programmed or designed
into the media. It was an active process where the participant developed a tool kit for working and learning in the
context of games. This is consistent with the perspective Suchman (1987) articled in regards to help systems built

                                                             637                                                    CSCL 2007
into copy machines; that AI systems are a resource for action rather than a programmed plan. In Johnny's case the
programmed aspects of the game were tested against his conception of how the coordinated tool kit worked. When
progress was not made on the task at hand, he reorganized.

References
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Becker, H. S. (1982). Art worlds. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Becker, H. S. (1995). The power of inertia. Qualitative Sociology, 18, 301-309.
Billett, S. (2006). Relational interdependence between social and individual agency in work and working life. Mind,
          Culture, & Activity, 13(1), 53-69.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications. In A.
          Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of Research in Education (Vol. 24, pp. 61-100). Washington,
          DC: AERA.
Bransford, J. D.,  Vye,  N., Stevens, R.,  Kuhl, P., Schwartz,  D., Philip  Bell, et al. (2006). Learning theories and
          education: Toward   a decade  of synergy   In P. Alexander  &  P. Winne    (Eds.), Handbook  of Educational
          Psychology (Second Edition). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
diSessa, A. (1991). Epistemological micromodels: The case of coordination and quantities. In J. Montagero & A.
          Tryphon (Eds.), Psychologie génétique et sciences cognitives (pp. 169-194). Geneva: Foundation Archives
          Jean Piaget.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave.
Goodwin, C., & Goodwin, M. H. (1998). Seeing as a situated activity: Formulating planes. In Y. Engestrom & D.
          Middleton  (Eds.),  Cognition  and   communication    at  work   (pp. 61-95).   Cambridge, UK:   Cambridge
          University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Latour, B. (1996). On interobjectivity. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 3(4).
Lave, J., & Wenger,     E.  (1991). Situated learning:  Legitimate  peripheral  participation. Cambridge:  Cambridge
          University Press.
Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
          Cognitions (pp. 47-87). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Squire, K., & Barab, S. (2004). Replaying history: Engaging urban underserved students in learning world history
          through computer simulation games. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A. Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. S. Nixon & F. Herrera
          (Eds.), Embracing diversity in the Learning Sciences: Proceedings of the sixth international conference of
          the Learning Sciences (pp. 505-512). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning. In R. K. Sawyer
          (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 409-425). New York: Cambridge University
          Press.
Stevens, R. (2000). Divisions of labor in school and in the workplace: Comparing computer and paper-supported
          activities across settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 373-401.
Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. In M. Lampert & M. L.
          Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teaching and learning (pp. 107-149). Cambridge:
          Cambridge University Press.
Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. (in press). In game, in room, in world: Reconnecting video game play to
          the rest of kids' lives. In K. Salen (Ed.), Ecology of games: Macarthur Foundation series on digital media
          and learning.
Stevens, R., Wineburg, S., Herrenkohl, L., & Bell, P. (2005). The comparative understanding of school subjects:
          Past, present and future. Review of Educational Research, 75(2), 125-157.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and situated actions : The problem of human-machine communication. Cambridge, UK:
          Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF#0354453).           Any opinions, findings
and conclusions expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. We also
want to thank Laurie McCarthy for her role in the Gaming to Learn project, along with Lari Garrison and Heather
Toomey Zimmerman for reading earlier drafts of this paper.

                                                           638                                                CSCL 2007
