      Video Traces: Creating Common Space between University and
                        Public Schools for Preparing New Teachers

                            Amit Saxena, Reed Stevens, University of Washington, Seattle
                               saxena@u.washington.edu, reedstev@u.washington.edu

          Abstract: The preparation of new teachers has been an enduring issue of the field of education
          (Handbook on Research on Teaching, 1963; 1973; 1986; 2001). The objectives of this paper are to
          describe the interaction among different stakeholders in teacher education facilitated by a novel
          technology-based approach, Video Traces. The analysis suggests that this is a potentially effective
          approach for making mutual learning across public school and university-based teacher educators
          more  concrete,   visible  and  compelling.   In  our   paper, we   (a)   present  an overview      of  the
          pedagogical   philosophy   that guided  the  design  of  the Video  Traces   medium,     (b) describe   the
          enduring problem in teacher education we are using Video Traces to address, and (c) present data
          and analysis from our approach in the context of North American educational system.

Theoretical framework
          Tensions between views of teaching and teacher preparation as constructed in university and public school
contexts  constitute one of   the most pervasive   and  enduring   problems  in  the work   of teacher  education.    Feiman-
Nemser   and  Buchmann    cleverly   characterized this as  the  "two  worlds problem"    over  two  decades    ago  (Feiman-
Nemser & Buchmann, 1985). The two worlds problem refers to the tensions between pre-service teacher preparation
at the  university  and the   in-service  classroom  practice.  Approaches    to   resolving some   of  these  tensions  have
involved various proposals for creating a "third space", in which university and public school educators could join in
collaborative dialogue and inquiry around teaching and learning (Goodlad, 1994; Holmes Group, 1986).              In addition,
there  needs  to be   more    direct and   compelling   evidence    of learning    outcomes    for teachers   if  institutional
commitments to collaboration among arts and sciences, education and school-based faculty are to be sustained over
time (Teitel, 2001).

          The Video   Traces  (see   Figure 1) is  a software   medium   that  gives  the users    ability to annotate  voice,
pointing, and  drawing   to "common      objects" in visual forms   such as  still images and   audio-video    files (Stevens,
2005).  The  Video   Traces medium     supports   features such  as concrete  and    durable records   of  conversations  and
natural modalities of looking, pointing, and talking.

                                              Figure 1. Video Traces software medium

          In our study,  the  Teacher     Education  Program    of  a  major  research  university   (PNU)     in the   Pacific
Northwest,   public  schools, and   Video  Traces  came    together to prepare   new  teachers. The    student  teachers scan
student works  from   their classrooms    and import  them  in  Video  Traces.  These  scans   and  videos  are  called bases.
Then they annotate the bases, in Video Traces, via a microphone connected to the computer. In addition to audio
annotation, student teachers also use the pointing and drawing tools in Video Traces to "jointly attend" to what is
being referred to in the recorded questions.    This combination is called a trace. Fellow student teachers, classroom

                                                             639                                                     CSCL 2007
teachers, university faculty and supervisors reviewed and responded to these traces in the same manner. In terms of
digital file formats, a trace is an audio-video file combining an image or a video with a voice and pointing overlay.
A trace thread is the sequence of response traces to an initial trace.

Data analysis and findings
       The  analysis   of actions and  events in   Video  Traces  is   framed using  concepts  and  techniques,  such  as
interactional sequence, from Conversation Analysis (CA) adapted to new technologies (Goodwin & Heritage, 1990;
Hutchby, 2001). The data for this study are 73 traces that were created within 23 threads by participants from May
2005 to November 2005. The participants were two each of student teachers, school faculty, university faculty, and
one   university  supervisor.  The  traces were    exported  as  audio-video   files and   transcribed  using  simplified
conventions of CA. The start and end points of gestural annotations were located in transcripts within parentheses.
This paper briefly reports on two categories of events--traces as recycling of questions and the traces as archival
resources. Due to space limitations, we have included data presentation only for the first category.

Traces as Recycling of Questions
          The thread featured Maya as student teacher, Anu as co-operating teacher, Jaya as university faculty, and
Lakshmi as another student teacher. A very brief data excerpt is presented in the Figure 2 below.

          Figure 2. The figure shows a transcribed excerpt from the trace thread. The audio annotation is marked with
  mic icon, pointing annotation with hand icon and the drawing annotation with the red pen icon. The analysis is
  marked with boxes and further referenced with categories such as socialization etc. The different strategies are
            marked in lighter color. The bottom section shows the chronological sequence of trace thread.

          Maya, in her initial trace, introduced the student and referenced the student work to the viewer by using the
natural modalities of pointing, drawing and speech available in the medium. Maya described the student's work,
gave her observations, and asked about the different strategies. Anu (school based faculty) responding to Maya's
trace greeted  her  by name.   She  "thickened"    Maya's description   by  detailed descriptions. Anu  suggested    three
strategies. Jaya (university faculty) complimented Maya on her question and responded with three suggestions about
student assignments, classroom practices such as small group guided reading, and ESL strategies. Lakshmi (student
teacher) introduced herself and reviewed Maya, Anu, and Jaya's traces. She brought up her prior interaction history
with  the student as a teacher  and made   observations  about  student's  pronunciation and  speech   patterns. Lakshmi
based her observations in Jaya's suggestion of working on pronunciation as well as on visual representation.

          The different collaborators in the teacher education process came together to interact around the student's
work as if they were in the same classroom. The analysis of the individual traces across the collection showed that
the users created traces; to analyze practice around student's works, to ask, to address content and practice specific
questions, and   to interpret and  present hypotheses   regarding  literacy practices. The users   took up  the  different
suggestions and hypotheses in their practice and responded as new traces. In this manner, the users embodied traces
in their classroom practice over and over again. This embodiment is defined in this study as recycling of questions.

          This   category  of   analysis   relates  to  the  "recycling    of  questions   and  consequently,     of  the
knowledge"(Ladson-Billings,     1994). The  recycling,   as defined    by Ladson-Billings, is situated  in the   discourse

                                                            640                                                  CSCL 2007
between  the  teacher     and  the   student  in  a classroom.     In this study,   the  recycling  of  questions  is  spread
asynchronously across time and space between a student teacher, her peers, and teacher educators. This recycling
creates a common space around classroom activity.

Traces as Archival Resources
         The thread featured Maya as student teacher, Sudha as university faculty, Anu as co-operating teacher, and
Lakshmi as another student teacher. Maya started her trace with a description of classroom practice. The description
was adapted from Anu's thickened description earlier in the findings section. Maya asked conceptual and procedural
questions about the student's practice. She ended her trace by asking for advice and suggestions for strategies. Sudha
(university faculty) introduced herself to Maya. Sudha then set up a small scenario to model possible engagement
with the student in response to Maya's conceptual and procedural question. She made another suggestion of using
stories as tools to understand math concepts. She supported Maya's way of engaging the student and pointed out that
the student's practice    is linked  to the  classroom   practice.  Lakshmi   reviewed    Maya   and  Sudha's  traces. In her
response, Lakshmi inferred from an earlier trace discussion between her and Sudha in a different trace thread. Her
suggestions to Maya were referred from that discussion. Anu referenced Sudha's suggestion of story contexts. She
stated that she would be using these ideas in her own practice and modeled a scenario for the next academic year.

         The second category is informed by Shulman's advocacy of teaching in which "the principled skills and the
well-studied  cases   are brought   together  in  the development     and  formation  of  strategic pedagogical knowledge"
(Shulman, 1986). The findings suggest that the traces can function as `cases' to inform the routine indeterminacy of
classroom   practice. Within   the  thread,  the different users   reviewed  and  responded   to previous  traces. The  users
entered  specific conversations     but  they also    entered  different  kinds  of   conversations  from their  disciplinary
perspectives. Within the collection, the threads act as archival resources. The users refer to specific suggestions from
other threads while   making    their traces. There   is an   increased  sophistication  in framing  questions  and   offering
interpretations. In this manner, the threads serve as documented and referred cases of student teaching and learning.

Educational importance of the study
         In  our study,   we  have  used  a  novel  technology-based    approach   of Video  Traces  to bring public   school-
based and university-based teacher educators together in mutually beneficial and visible discussions on teaching and
learning. Our analysis shows that the participants made traces that captured student learning in classrooms, analyzed
those situations, noticed teaching practices, interpreted those practices in broader contexts, made hypotheses, and
offered  suggestions  for  further  work  in  the  classrooms.   The  traces created  from  this collaborative dialogue   and
inquiry  present  evidence   of student   teacher   learning  in actual  classrooms   and serve  as  documented    cases. The
creation of common space mediated by Video Traces distributes the onus of "thinking like a teacher" (Kleinfeld,
1992) and acting like a teacher collectively among the human and technological resources of the partnership. The
findings from   our study    suggest that the technology-based     approach  of   Video  Traces  supports novice   teachers in
their actual classrooms   and   creates a "third  space"   to bring   university and  public-school-based  teacher educators
together in the teacher education process.

References
Goodlad, J. (1994). Educational renewal: Better teachers, better schools. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Goodwin. C. & Heritage, J. (1990). Conversation analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 283-307.
Holmes Group (1986). Tomorrow's teachers: A report of the Holmes Group. Lansing, MI: author.
Hutchby, I. (2001). Conversation and Technology: From the Telephone to the Internet. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kleinfeld, J. (1992). Learning to think like a teacher: The study of cases. In J. H. Shulman (Ed.), Case methods in
         teacher education (pp. 33-49). New York: Teachers College Press.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1994). The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Children. San Francisco,
         CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Shulman. L.S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher. 15(2), 4-14.
Stevens, R. (2005). Capturing ideas in digital things: The Traces digital annotation medium. In Goldman, R.,
         Barron, B., Pea, R., & (Eds.), Video Research in the Learning Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.
Teitel, L (2001) An assessment framework for professional development schools. Journal of Teacher Education, 52,
         57-69.

                                                               641                                                  CSCL 2007
