                   Improving Young Learners' Scientific Understanding
                                            in CSCL Environments

    Hyo-Jeong So, National Institute of Education,, Nanyang Technological University, hyojeong.so@nie.edu.sg

         Abstract.     The    purpose  of   the  present  study   was   to  improve    young  learners'   scientific
         understanding in CSCL environments. The study consisted of two phases: Phase I for fostering a
         collaborative learning culture, and Phase II for using Knowledge Forum as a CSCL tool. Primary
         3    students in  one  Singapore   school participated   in this  study. Findings  suggested    that   while
         students   were     motivated to learn in CSCL    environments,    they  had  difficulties monitoring   and
         sharing knowledge for their own understanding. Additionally, a great deal of teacher guidance
         was   needed     to encourage  student  participation in collaborative   knowledge   building   processes.
         Overall, this study may imply that students at this early stage of schooling need more structured
         guidance to improve their understanding in CSCL environments.

Introduction
         The main purpose of the project in the present paper was to build a culture of classroom practices that are
grounded    in  collaborative   learning    and knowledge   building,    which   is known    as the   Knowledge       Building
Community model (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994). Knowledge Building is based on the concepts of communal
constructivism   (Meehan,     Holmes,   &   Tangney,  2001)  and  situated   learning  (Lave  &     Wenger,    1991)  whereby
communities    of  learners   construct   a communal     knowledge    base  through   interaction,  inquiry,   discussion  and
reflection. For knowledge to be constructed by the community of learners, a culture needs to be enacted in which
learners interact  with   each  other  in collaborative  ways.   With   the culture of  knowledge    building    in place,  the
additional    interactive dimension    of technology   systems,   e.g., Knowledge     Forum  (KF),    a  computer-supported
collaborative learning (CSCL) environment, can then be incorporated to further enhance the discussion, sharing,
reflections on and retention of that communal knowledge pool (Bielaczyc & Collins, 2006). The emphasis of the
project was placed on employing collaborative inquiry-centered pedagogy, instead of traditional didactic pedagogy
deeply rooted in many classrooms, in order to foster a collaborative knowledge building culture. After the process
of  collaborative  culture   building,  Knowledge   Forum   was   employed     as a  medium   to    facilitate the  process of
scientific knowledge      building among    students. This  paper  reports  on   early findings of   the three-year   plan  of
fostering and building CSCL environments at one primary school in Singapore.

Theoretical framework
         Basically, the main theoretical framework is to help students learn how to collaboratively work with others,
how to inquire knowledge, and how to reflect on their thinking process in CSCL environments. Specifically, this
study is based on Knowledge Building, "defined as the production and continual improvement of ideas of value to a
community, through means that increase the likelihood that what the community accomplishes will be greater than
the sum    of individual  contributions   and part of broader   cultural  efforts."(Scardamalia  &   Bereiter,  2003). In   the
classroom, Knowledge Building is usually initiated by a theme of inquiry relevant to a topic. Ideas and questions
that the students have about the theme are then articulated and posted in a discussion forum as notes. Knowledge
forum then    acts as  a  communal     database where  the ideas  are   seeded and  improved.   As   the participants  engage
themselves in the various means of advancing, they challenge each other's ideas through building new notes or
revising existing notes. This phase is essentially a social process mediated by knowledge-building discourse that
focuses  on    sharing   new   knowledge,    synthesizing  new   knowledge     with  prior knowledge,     detecting   gaps  in
understanding, co-construction of theory and so on. Eventually, it leads to the growth of the database which reflects
the progress of the community as a whole.

Research Methodology
         Participants of this study included Primary 3 students in a Singapore school. The majority of the students
come from homes with low to middle SES. Among various subject areas, this study focused on Science lessons.
Using a design experiment (Brown, 1992) as a methodological approach, the research team designed lesson plans

                                                             645                                                     CSCL 2007
and lab  activities  with  the Science  teachers.    The intervention    strategies employed   collaborative  learning  and
knowledge building activities involving heterogeneous groups of pupils of varying ability levels in the classroom
prior to the introduction of Knowledge Forum as a learning tool. Mixed methodology was employed to provide
multifaceted  perspectives  of  the research  questions.   Qualitative   data included   classroom  observations,  student
artifacts (e.g., think cards, worksheets, KF postings, etc), and interviews with selected students. Quantitative data on
the rate of learning achievement    was    collected based on    the mastery  of instructional objectives  as stated in the
school curriculum.

         Research findings of Phase I and II are presented in the present paper. The main purpose of Phase I was to
foster a collaborative learning culture in classrooms. It should be noted that that since our aim was to build up a
collaborative knowledge    building  culture  prior  to  the introduction  of  a    Knowledge  Forum  as   a  collaborative
learning tool, all the activities in Phase I were carried out without any online activities and technology components.
Basically,  students participated in  learning activities    that were   designed   around the  principles of   Knowledge
Building (Hewitt & Scardamalia, 1998) in the following order:
1.  Trigger activity and Idea Generation ­ the knowledge building pursuit starts with a trigger activity to
    encourage students to generate ideas and questions on the theme or topic, and to write down these ideas and
    questions on specially designed think cards;
2.  Idea Connection ­ the teacher then guides the students into the process of searching for classifications to
    connect the ideas generated on the think cards, and these classifications are visually constructed using a
    knowledge web of think cards;
3.  Direct Teaching ­ this is the part where the authoritative voice of the teacher is heard, providing the initial
    impetus and framework for the students to start searching for information to create their individual and
    communal knowledge base;
4.  Laboratory activities ­ these are experiments, either within a laboratory or outdoor setting, designed to help
    students in their search for information and knowledge;
5.  Reflections on laboratory activities ­ these reflections are scaffolded by questions on reflection sheets to help
    students think about what they have learnt, how this new knowledge has helped them in answering their initial
    questions about the theme or topic of study, and what new perspectives of knowledge has been built from the
    laboratory activities;
6.  Individual and communal pull-together ­ this is the activity, initiated by the teacher, that guides the students
    into looking at the knowledge that each individual has built from the preceding activities and to draw the
    individual strands into a group and communal pool of knowledge built up on the theme or topic for study.

Next, the purpose of Phase II was to improve student understanding of science principles and concepts in a CSCL
environment where Knowledge Forum was employed as a technological tool. Instead of using think cards, students
used Knowledge Forum to share their ideas. Students worked collaboratively with 4-5 group members.

Results
         Rather than discussing data in a separate manner, findings from data analyses were integrated to provide a
clear picture of what happened in the early stage of the implementation. At the end of the term, a test consisting of
13 items from knowledge building units (Magnets and Materials) and 17 items from non-knowledge building units
(Living  things &   Non-living  things) was   administered   to   measure  student   understanding. A statistical analysis
showed   that there  was   no  significant difference  on  test   scores between    knowledge  building   units (M=57.83,
SD=22.14)   and  non-knowledge    building   units   (M=60.72,    SD=15.85).  While   it may   be thought  that employing
collaborative knowledge-building activities could reduce performance on traditional types of assessments, this result
can be interpreted that there was no negative effect on traditional measures. The analysis of observations indicated
that students were motivated by trigger activities and Knowledge Forum. Students perceived that starting a lesson
with a trigger activity and idea generation was quite different from typical lessons where teachers directly introduce
lesson topics from textbooks. In the focus group interviews, students mentioned that they enjoyed working with
friends during Science lessons as they could learn from their friends' ideas.

         While it was encouraging to discover the students' increased motivation in CSCL environments, several
issues were identified as problematic. One of the biggest problems was lack of idea improvement. The analysis of
think cards and KF postings revealed that the initial ideas of many students were rarely improved. Although lab
activities and reflection times were employed to encourage students to improve their ideas over time, student ideas

                                                             646                                                  CSCL 2007
generally consisted of isolated facts with little explanations. This result might be related to lack of resources for idea
improvement. The analysis of the data from the focus group interviews revealed that many students had limited
access to resources other than the Science textbook. This was especially true of the students from low SES families,
of which there was a majority in the school.  Many of these children do not have home access to computers and the
Internet. They also did not search for additional information from books available in the school library. As for the
small number of children who had home access to computers and the Internet, their web surfing largely consisted of
games rather than Science-related searches. Additionally, the analysis of the observation data revealed a lack of
collaborative  learning. Although    the students  carried out  their  knowledge    building   activities in collaborative
learning  groups, there  was little evidence  of  collaboration in   the  learning process among   the    group members.
Activities in science labs and computer labs were conducted collaboratively, but the learning process was individual
rather than collaborative. Specifically, little KF postings were connected to other postings and few students posted
questions to other groups.

Conclusion
         Building a CSCL environment is a difficult endeavor, especially in classrooms where students have little
exposure to collaborative learning approaches. Our results showed that while it is critical for students to monitor
and build knowledge for their own understanding, they had difficulties developing such skills. Although attempts
were made to improve young students' science learning through scaffoldings such as think cards, reflection sheets
and Knowledge     Forum,   results revealed that students  in  this study  needed  more specific   scaffolding  strategies.
Additionally, results of the present study are consistent with previous studies that found a great deal of teacher
guidance is needed to encourage student participation in collaborative knowledge building processes (Caswell &
Bielaczyc, 2001; Hewitt, 2001). For instance, teachers need to help students see the value of building knowledge for
their own understanding, instead of completing tasks given by a teacher (Hewitt, 2001). Overall, this study may
imply that students at this early stage of schooling need more structured guidance toward reflective inquiry learning
in CSCL environments.

References
Bielaczyc,   K., &  Collins,  A.   (2006).  Implementation    paths:   Supporting  the  trajectory teachers    traverse  in
         implementing    technology-based   learning environments      in classroom  practice. Educational    Technology,
         46(3), 8-14.
Brown,    A.  (1992). Design    experiments:   Theoretical    and   methodological    challenges   in creating   complex
         interventions. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 2, 141-178.
Caswell, B., & Bielaczyc, K. (2001). Knowledge forum: Altering the relationship between students and scientific
         knowledge. Education, Communication & Information, 1(3), 281-305.
Hewitt, J. (2001). From a focus on tasks to a focus on understanding: The cultural transformation of a Toronto
         classroom. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall & M. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL2: Carrying forward the conversation
         (pp. 11-41). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hewitt, J., & Scardamalia, M. (1998). Design principles for distributed Knowledge Building processes. Educational
         Psychology Review, 10(1), 76-96.
Johnson,  D.   W.,  &   Johnson,   R. T.   (1999). Learning    together   and  alone  : cooperative,      competitive, and
         individualistic learning (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Lave, J., &   Wenger,   E. (1991).  Situated learning: Legitimate    peripheral  participation. Cambridge:     Cambridge
         University Press.
Meehan,   S., Holmes,  B., &  Tangney,   B.  (2001). Who   wants    to be  a teacher?  An exploration of the theory of
         communal constructivism at the chalk face. Teacher Development, 5(2), 177-190.
Scardamalia,  M.,  &  Bereiter, C.  (1994). Computer   support  for  knowledge-building    communites.     The  Journal  of
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge Building. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Education
         (pp. 1370-1373). New York: Mcamillan Reference.

                                                           647                                                   CSCL 2007
