  Constructing new knowledge in collaboration: instructional support
         for improving information pooling and processing in groups

     Hans Spada & Anne Meier, University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
            Email: hans.spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de, anne.meier@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

         Groups  can   build   valuable  new  knowledge    by   drawing  inferences   from    their members'
         complementary   knowledge.    Unfortunately,  groups  tend to  focus on    information known   to all
         members    from the start ("shared") and neglect  members'    unique ("unshared")    knowledge.  The
         present study investigated whether a similar bias could also be found at the level of inferences
         drawn from shared and unshared information. In an experiment, 27 student dyads solved a murder
         mystery task  over    a videoconferencing    system. A  control  condition  was    compared   to two
         instructed conditions   which  were  informed about   typical task difficulties, and either  received
         external guidance from a collaboration script (script condition), or planned their own collaboration
         (planning condition). Dialog analyses revealed the expected biases towards shared information in
         both the pooling of text information and the drawing of inferences. Instructional support helped
         dyads to produce more correct solutions, but did not improve the drawing of inferences.

         Groups of learners and problem solvers can profit greatly from pooling and integrating their members'
complementary knowledge. In particular, new knowledge can be built at the group level by drawing inferences from
the information contributed by individuals. This collaborative pooling and integration of information enables the co-
construction of new shared knowledge (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995) and the generation of more advanced problem
solutions (e.g. Rummel & Spada, 2005). Thus, it is an important aspect of successful collaboration (Meier, Spada, &
Rummel, 2007). Unfortunately, groups tend to focus on information that is known to all members from the start
("shared") and neglect members' unique ("unshared") knowledge. For this reason, groups typically fail to detect the
best solution in "hidden profile" situations, where the best alternative can only be found if all available shared and
unshared information is pooled (see Wittenbaum, Hollingshead, & Botero, 2004 for an overview). Experimental
research on the effects of information sharedness on group discussion, however, has so far focused on the mere
pooling of information and neglected higher levels of information processing, i.e. the collaborative construction of
new knowledge. The present study therefore 1) investigated whether biases towards shared information can also be
found at the level of inferences, and 2) explored two kinds of instructional support for overcoming such biases.

The task: solving a murder mystery
         Dyads  of  university students  collaborated on a murder   mystery   case  over  a desktop-videoconferencing
system. Each student first read a set of "interrogation protocols" individually, which had to be returned after 30
minutes. The dyad was then given 50 minutes to discuss which out of four suspects had most likely committed the
murder, and to justify their decision. To succeed, students had to draw 12 inferences from both shared and unshared
pieces of information, yielding the motive, the alibi, and one further piece of evidence for each of the four suspects.
The task was a "hidden profile" in that the unconnected, individual pieces of information pointed towards the wrong
suspect, while the  inferences   pointed towards  the  murderer. All   participants were   informed  that their sets of
information differed to some extent, that they had to return all materials after reading them, and that they were
supposed to find motives, alibis, and further evidence for the four suspects. In order to investigate the effect of
information sharedness on information processing, three types of inferences were analyzed (Table 1):
-   "collaborative inferences" from unshared information distributed between dyad members
-   "individual inferences" from unshared information located with the same dyad member ("undistributed"), and
-   "common inferences" from shared information.

         The text information in the "interrogation protocols" was distributed between participants in such a way
that each dyad could draw four collaborative, four individual, and four common inferences. Three different text
versions of the murder mystery story were realized in order to not confound the sharedness of information items and
inferences with the implications of their specific content. All data were aggregated over these text versions.

                                                          648                                                  CSCL 2007
Table 1: Visualization of collaborative, individual, and common inferences (adapted from Härder & Spada, 2004)

         Information                Person A          Person B           Type of inference
         unshared, distributed                                           collaborative
         unshared, undistributed                                         individual
         shared                                                          common

       In line with the existing literature (Wittenbaum et al., 2004), our hypothesis was that more shared than
unshared text information would be pooled. In addition, group members holding an interdependent pair of unshared,
undistributed  information should   find  this information  more  relevant   (and   probably easier    to remember)    than
isolated pieces of unshared, distributed information (Fraidin, 2004). Our hypothesis concerning the three types of
inferences was that common inferences should be the easiest type to draw, because they can be drawn individually
by each member as well as collaboratively. Collaborative inferences, on the other hand, should be the hardest type to
draw, because they can only be drawn collaboratively during discussion.

Videoconferencing setting
       During     collaboration,  dyad    members    sat   in  adjacent    rooms    and  collaborated     via  a   desktop-
videoconferencing system (VCON running with ViGO). This setting established controlled conditions in which all
utterances and actions could be recorded. Dyads were provided with a shared text editor (Groove Office) which both
students could access and edit at the same time. A first shared document contained a questionnaire in which students
judged how likely each of the suspects had committed the murder, and wrote down their final decision. A second
shared document served to collect information and collaboratively write down a justification for the joint solution.
Both documents were available during the whole length of the discussion. Each student also received paper and
pencil for individual note-taking. All dyads underwent a short technical tutorial prior to collaboration.

Instructional support
       Three    experimental   conditions   were realized:  two  instructed   conditions, and   an    uninstructed control
condition. Individuals in both instructed conditions were informed about typical task difficulties in advance of their
collaboration on the murder mystery task: the existence of unshared information, the need to recall all information
from memory during discussion, and the need to draw inferences in order to find a good solution. Dyads in the script
condition were then provided with external guidance from a collaboration script (running on a second computer
monitor) which prescribed four phases of work: Students were to first pool the available information thoroughly in
their shared text editor, and then engage in a phase of individual recall in order to complete the information pool. In
a third phase, students were told to search for interconnections between pieces of information, and to write down
inferences regarding motives, alibis, and further evidence for all suspects. Finally, the script instructed students to
summarize their information and make a decision. Structuring collaboration by means of collaboration scripts has
proved an effective means of fostering the generation of new knowledge (e.g. Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2006).
Collaboration  scripts, however,  also bear the  danger  of reducing    motivation, in  particular if they run   counter to
participants' own  strategies for effective collaboration   and problem-solving     (Dillenbourg,  2002).  Therefore,   the
means of   support employed    in the  second   instructed  condition,  informed  planning,  aimed     at facilitating self-
regulation by  prompting   students to   construct their own    script, presumably   more   in line   with  their "internal
collaboration scripts" (Kollar et al., 2006). Prior to the murder mystery task, dyads in this planning condition were
given 10 minutes to discuss how they wanted to structure their problem-solving process. They were encouraged to
write down their plan in an additional shared text editor that stayed available for them during problem-solving.

Design
       Instructional support (control/script/planning) was realized as a between-subjects factor, and sharedness of
information   (shared/unshared   undistributed/unshared    distributed)  as  within-subjects   factor. Fifty-four   female
students from various departments (except psychology) with an average age of M=23.17 (SD=3.32) years took part
in the experiment. Dyads were randomly assigned to one of the three conditions (n = 9 dyads per condition). Dyads'
collaboration was  videotaped  and  later coded  for relevant  pieces   of text information  and   inferences in  students'
discussion. The correctness of the solution served as an outcome measure.

                                                           649                                                    CSCL 2007
Results and discussion
         Analysis of students' dialogs revealed the expected effects of information sharedness. An ANOVA with
information sharedness (unshared distributed/unshared undistributed/shared) as within-subjects factor, experimental
condition as between-subjects factor, and pooled information as the dependent variable confirmed our hypotheses:
Across all conditions, 71% of unshared distributed, 84% of unshared undistributed, and 93% of shared information
was pooled (F=11.44, p<.001; partial 2= .32). An ANOVA with the number of drawn inferences as the dependent
variable also revealed a significant effect of information sharedness (F=7.56; p=.001; partial 2=.24): Across all
conditions, 49%   of the    collaborative inferences, 65%    of the  individual  inferences,  and  79%    of the common
inferences were drawn (compare Table 1). Thus, collaborative inferences emerged as the most difficult, as expected.
Interestingly, the number of collaborative inferences drawn during discussion also showed the highest correlation
with the probability rating students gave for the correct suspect in their solution (r=.42; p=.03). Thus, the integration
of unshared,  distributed   information into new  shared  knowledge    was   indeed  very important  for  finding  a  good
solution. These effects go well beyond the existing literature on the effects of information sharedness in "hidden
profile"-like situations on group information processing (e.g. Wittenbaum et al., 2004). For the field of CSCL, the
findings may suggest that complementary knowledge is not only a great resource for learning, but also a significant
challenge for  successful   collaboration that calls for support.   However, more    research is needed   in order to find
effective support measures. The instructional support realized in the present study, contrary to expectations, did not
improve the drawing of inferences significantly. Nevertheless, it did lead to a higher number of correct solutions of
the murder mystery case: All dyads in the two instructed conditions, but only 6 dyads in the control condition solved
the case correctly (²=6.75; p=.03). This difference was probably mediated by a stronger focus on inferences in the
uptakes  during discussion    in the  instructed  conditions.   However,   this effect did   not  reach the   .05-level of
significance (F=3.09; p=.06; partial 2=.21). We assume that a more difficult task would have been necessary in
order to detect differences between experimental conditions.

         To  better understand   the  processes  involved  in   the collaborative drawing  of    inferences, a descriptive
analysis of the patterns in which inferences were actually drawn during discussion was performed, that will inform
further approaches   towards  supporting   the collaborative  drawing   of inferences  from   distributed information.  A
follow-up study is planned to explore more specific support measures, both in the form of instruction and in the
form of technical tools embedded in the collaboration environment, and evaluate their effects with the help of more
difficult task materials.

References
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design.
         In P. A.   Kirschner  (Ed.), Three    worlds of CSCL.    Can  we  support   CSCL  (pp.   61-91). Heerlen:   Open
         Universiteit Nederland.
Fraidin, S. N. (2004). When is one head better than two? Interdependent information in group decision making.
         Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 93, 102-113.
Härder, J., & Spada, H. (2004). Exchange of unshared information and their utilization in collaborative inferences in
         work via a desktop video-conferencing system. Paper presented at the conference of the German Society of
         Psychology (DGPs) 2004.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. (2006). Collaboration scripts ­ a conceptual analysis. Educational Psychology
         Review, 18, 159-185.
Meier,  A., Spada,  H.,   & Rummel,   N.  (2007). A   rating scheme   for  assessing the  quality of computer-supported
         collaboration processes. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S.D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In C.
         O'Malley (Ed.), Computer supported collaborative learning (pp. 69-97). Berlin: Springer.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate: An instructional approach to promoting problem-solving
         in computer-mediated settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14, 201-241.
Wittenbaum, G.M., Hollingshead, A.B., & Botero, I.C. (2004). From cooperative to motivated information sharing
         in groups: moving beyond the hidden profile paradigm. Communication Monographs, 71, 286-310.

Acknowledgments
This work is being funded by the Virtual Graduate School "Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with
New Media" of the German Science Foundation (www.vgk.de).

                                                            650                                                  CSCL 2007
