                                          Meaning making in CSCL:
  Conditions and preconditions for cognitive processes by groups

                                  Gerry Stahl, Drexel University, gerry.stahl@drexel.edu

          Abstract. Meaning making is central to the interactions that take place in CSCL settings. The
          collaborative construction of shared meaning is a complex process that has not previously been
          analyzed   in  detail despite   the fact    that  it is  often acknowledged     as  being   the distinguishing
          element    in CSCL.   Here,     a three-minute    excerpt     from   a discussion  among    three  students  is
          considered in some detail. The students are reflecting on their analysis of mathematical patterns in
          a  synchronous   online   environment     with   text   chat and  a  shared  whiteboard.  Several   interaction
          methods    and   group   cognitive   processes       are identified.   The  analysis  suggests  a  number   of
          conditions and preconditions of such interaction. These are necessary for achieving the potential
          of CSCL as the accomplishment of high-order cognitive tasks by small groups of learners. An
          understanding of the conditions and preconditions of the small-group meaning-making process
          may aid in the design and analysis of CSCL activities, as well as in the development of a theory of
          group cognition.

The uniqueness of CSCL
          The vision of CSCL is that networked computers can bring learners together in new ways and that shared
digital environments can foster interactions that produce new understandings for the groups and their participants.
Accordingly,    the  uniqueness    of CSCL    pedagogical       and    technological  designs  consists   in their techniques  for
supporting   group   interactions  that can   solve   problems,     gain insights, build  knowledge.    To   guide design, CSCL
theory  needs   to  explicate  the  processes  by     which    groups   accomplish    these cognitive  tasks  and  to specify  the
preconditions for such interactions to take place.
          In the formative days of the history of CSCL (see Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006), collaboration was
defined as "a process by which individuals negotiate and share meanings relevant to the problem-solving task at
hand... a coordinated, synchronous activity that is the result of a continued attempt to construct and maintain a
shared conception of a problem" (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995, p. 70). The study of collaboration so defined suggests
a shift away from the psychology of the individual to the small group as the unit of analysis, and a process-oriented
focus  on   the socially-constructed    properties    of   small-group   interaction:  "Empirical   studies  have  more   recently
started to focus less on establishing parameters for effective collaboration and more on trying to understand the role
that such variables play in mediating interaction" (Dillenbourg et al., 1996, p. 189, emphasis added). These re-
definitions  of  the object of  research    differentiate   an  approach    to   CSCL  interested  in group   cognition   from the
orientations  of educational-psychology       studies    of individual   learning  in  settings of  cooperation    and/or distance
learning.
          CSCL has been defined explicitly in terms of the analysis of meaning making. A keynote at CSCL 2002
proposed: "CSCL is a field of study centrally concerned with meaning and the practices of meaning making in the
context   of joint   activity,  and   the   ways   in  which    these   practices  are  mediated   through    designed    artifacts"
(Koschmann,     2002,   p. 18).  Recently,    this  approach       has been  re-conceptualized   as studying   the  "practices  of
understanding" (Koschmann & Zemel, 2006). At the CSCL 2005 conference, a research agenda for the field was
proposed in terms of "intersubjective meaning making" (Suthers, 2006b). This emphasis has a two-fold implication.
It suggests that empirical studies investigate the processes of meaning making that take place in the studied settings.
But also, in theoretical terms, it implies that we should be analyzing the nature of shared meaning and the structures
of small-group meaning-making processes in general.
          For all the talk about meaning making, there has been little empirical analysis of how meaning is actually
constructed   in small-group    interactions.    It is generally       assumed   that meaning   is created   and   shared through
processes of interaction, communication and coordination. But the nature of these processes is taken for granted.
Even a special journal issue on "Meaning Making" presents alternative analyses of a particular interaction recording
and reflects on the methodologies used, but never explicitly discusses what is meant by the term "meaning making"
(Koschmann, 1999). Similarly, a recent book devoted to the topic of Meaning in Mathematics Education concludes

                                                                   651                                                   CSCL 2007
that "various aspects of communication which may affect the construction of meaning are discussed. On the other
hand, the problem of the construction of meaning itself is not really tackled" (Kilpatrick et al., 2005, p. 137).
          For some time, I have been trying to work out structures of collaborative meaning making. At ICLS 2000, I
presented  a model     of collaborative  knowledge      building (Stahl, 2006b,   Ch.   9), followed   at CSCL    2002 with a
theoretical framework for CSCL (Stahl, 2006b, Ch. 11). In an extended analysis of building collaborative knowing
illustrated with my SimRocket data, I presented elements of a social theory of CSCL centered on meaning making
(Stahl, 2006b,   Ch.   15).  I subsequently    distinguished   between   interpretation  from    individual perspectives  and
meaning as shared and embodied in artifacts in the world in my CSCL 2003 paper (Stahl, 2006b, Ch. 16). At CSCL
2005, I argued that groups can think, that they can have cognitive agency (Stahl, 2006b, Ch. 19). My book on
Group   Cognition   develops    this notion   that small groups    of learners--particularly  with   the  support of carefully
crafted  digital environments--have      the   potential  to achieve   cognitive  accomplishments,     such  as  mathematical
problem solving. Here, the term "group cognition" does not refer to some kind of mental content, but to the ability
of groups to engage in linguistic processes that can produce results that would be termed "cognitive" if achieved by
an individual, but that in principle cannot be reduced to mental representations of an individual or of a sum of
individuals. Thus, the theory of group cognition is similar to theories of distributed cognition, but now the emphasis
is more on distribution among people rather than with artifacts, and the cognitive accomplishments are high-order
tasks like math problem solving rather than routine symbol manipulations.
          Recently, my colleagues and I have been investigating specific structures of meaning-making practices,
analyzing online interactions among math students. For instance, we characterized "math-proposal adjacency pairs"
(Stahl, 2006d), looked at how a group could solve a math problem that none of its members could solve (Stahl,
2006a), and investigated how students used a referencing tool in our environment (Stahl, 2006c). We try to closely
analyze brief interactions in well-documented case studies to determine the social practices or methods that groups
use  to accomplish     their meaning   making.     Thereby,  we   seek   to determine   structures  of small-group   cognitive
processes. We believe that the foundation of CSCL as a unique field of study is the investigation of the meaning-
making processes that take place in online collaborative settings. The analysis of intersubjective meaning making or
group cognition is not the whole story; one can, of course, also analyze individual learning and other psychological
phenomena or larger activity structures and communities-of-practice, but we believe the processes of small-group
interaction are of particular centrality to CSCL.
A case of group cognition
          Although meaning and related topics like grounding have been debated for millennia, they have usually
been discussed using examples that were made up by the authors to seem like natural, commonsensical interactions
or using data from laboratory conditions. To study interaction "in the wild" or with examples that occurred in real-
life situations  is a  new   and important    approach   that  we   can  borrow   from  ethnography    (Hutchins,  1996)  and
ethnomethodology      (Garfinkel,   1967). However,     finding  cases  of  interaction that are relevant  to CSCL    research
interests cannot    be left  up  to  chance.   CSCL     research aims   to  inform technological    and   pedagogical  design.
Therefore, cycles of design-based research are often appropriate. One must put students in situations where they are
motivated to pursue certain kinds of tasks in particular kinds of environments. The situations must be instrumented
to capture an adequate record of the interactions that take place.
          In this paper, we will observe meaning making in a brief excerpt from Spring Fest 2006 of the Virtual
Math Teams (VMT) service at mathforum.org. The collaborative context was set by organizing a contest: members
of  the most collaborative     teams would    win  prizes. Students   were   recruited  globally through  teachers who    were
involved in other Math Forum activities. The team in the excerpt consisted of two students who apparently went to
the same school and one from another time zone in the US, as well as a facilitator from the Math Forum, who
provided   technical   assistance--this  is   all  that either  the   students or  the  facilitator knew   about  each  other.
Pedagogically, the topic for discussion was an open-ended exploration of geometric patterns. An initial pattern of
squares formed from sticks was given. The students were to figure out the formulae for the number of squares and
the  number  of  sticks   at stage   N first, and  then  explore   other patterns  that they  or other    teams invented. The
technological environment combined text chat with a shared whiteboard. It included a referencing tool for pointing
to areas of the drawing from chat postings (Mühlpfordt & Stahl, 2007). There was a supplementary wiki for sharing
results between teams. To support the research methodology, all activities were logged. The chat and whiteboard
could subsequently be replayed at any speed and stepped through. Virtually all aspects of the group interaction
including everything that the participants knew about each other's actions were captured and available for analysis
(see Table 1 and Figure 1).

                                                               652                                                   CSCL 2007
         Each team in Spring Fest 2006 met for four sessions over a two-week period. Each session lasted a little
over an hour. At the end of each session, the teams were supposed to post their findings on a wiki for the other
teams to read. Between sessions, the facilitators posted feedback to the teams on their whiteboards. The feedback
generally acknowledged the team's accomplishments and suggested next steps. In the case considered here, the team
was particularly encouraged to explain what they had done because it was not clear to the facilitators from the
interactions that the team members always understood what each other was doing.
Table 1. A three minute excerpt of the chat log. Line numbers have been added and the delay in seconds from the
previous message has been calculated.
    line    participant   chat posting                                                               time        delay
    1393    Quicksilver   (a) was define the problem, (b) was the solution which we got...           07.29.46
    1394    bwang8        we calculated the # of square if the diamond makes a perfect square        07.29.48    2
    1395    Aznx          We can define the problem.                                                 07.29.48    0
    1396    Aznx          We got the solutions.                                                      07.29.55    7
    1397    Quicksilver   yes                                                                        07.30.12    17
    1398    Quicksilver   the added corners                                                          07.30.16    4
    1399    Aznx          But I'm not sure how to explain how we got to the solutions, although it   07.30.18    2
                          makes prefect sense to me.
    1400    Quicksilver   to make a square                                                           07.30.19    1
    1401    Aznx          I'm just not sure how to explain it.                                       07.30.24    5
    1402    Quicksilver   and we found those were triangular numbers                                 07.30.25    1
    1403    Aznx          Well, I can explain the second formula.                                    07.30.32    7
    1404    Quicksilver   lets go step by step                                                       07.30.35    3
    1405    Quicksilver   NO!                                                                        07.30.37    2
    1406    Quicksilver   we don't know hte second formula                                           07.30.42    5
    1407    Aznx          It was done through the method of finsing the pattern of triangular #s.    07.30.45    3
    1408    Aznx          Yes we do.                                                                 07.30.50    5
    1409    Quicksilver   ?                                                                          07.30.55    5
    1410    Aznx          Suppose their second formula is our third.                                 07.30.56    1
    1411    Quicksilver   That was taem c's tho                                                      07.31.06    10
    1412    Aznx          No.                                                                        07.31.12    6
    1413    Aznx          They didn't do.                                                            07.31.16    4
    1414    Aznx          The nuumber of squares                                                     07.31.20    4
    1415    Quicksilver   ohj!                                                                       07.31.25    5
    1416    Aznx          or the find the big square                                                 07.31.26    1
    1417    Quicksilver   that formula                                                               07.31.27    1
    1418    Quicksilver   i thot u meant the other one                                               07.31.31    4
    1419    Quicksilver   yeah that is ours                                                          07.31.36    5
    1420    bwang8        point formula out with the tools so we don't get confused                  07.32.37    61
    1421    Aznx          So we're technically done with all of it right?                            07.32.49    12
    1422    Quicksilver   this is ours                                                               07.32.51    2
    1423    Quicksilver   all right...lets put it on the wiki                                        07.32.58    7
    1424    Aznx          That is theirs.                                                            07.33.02    4
    1425    Quicksilver   adn lets clearly explain it                                                07.33.05    3
    1426    Aznx          bwang you do it. =P                                                        07.33.11    6
         Pattern problems are commonly used in teaching the concepts of beginning algebra. The research literature
on this shows that explaining solution paths is generally particularly difficult for students (Moss & Beatty, 2006).
By pressing the students to explain their work in the wiki posting--and to prepare for this in their chat interaction--

                                                               653                                                 CSCL 2007
we encouraged the creation of data that allows us to see something of how a group of students made sense of their
mathematical    problem  solving and   where    they had     difficulty  in conducting   group  practices    leading    to
understanding.

Figure 1. View of VMT-Chat environment during excerpt. The selected chat message appears as line 1424 in Table
1. Note the graphical reference from this posting to a formula on the whiteboard.
Analysis of the meaning making
         At first glance, the excerpt in Table 1 seems hard to follow. In fact, that is why the VMT research group
started to look at this segment in one of its data sessions. The postings themselves express lack of clarity (e.g., line
1410), inability to explain what is going on (line 1401) and confusion about what is being discussed (line 1418). In
addition, it is hard to understand how the postings hang together, how the participants are responding to each other
and making sense together. It is often informative to focus on such excerpts. When the taken-for-granted flow of
conversation breaks down--seemingly for the participants as well as for the researchers--the nature and structure of
the interaction is likely to be made explicit and available for analysis. For instance, in my SimRocket excerpt (Stahl,
2006b, Ch. 12), the students' shared understanding of the facilitator's reference broke down, and they had to work
hard to make the reference successively more explicit until everyone saw it the same way. Similarly, the analysis of
deictic referencing in the VMT environment (Stahl, 2006c) looked at how students combined available resources to
define a math object that was not at first clear and that required considerable work to establish agreement on what
was being referenced. In the excerpt in this paper, the meaning-making process is displayed by the participants as
problematic for them--presenting an analytic opportunity for us as researchers to observe characteristics of meaning
making rendered visible in their announced breakdown and explicit repair.
         This is a common pattern in collaborative small group interactions. In our corpus of about 1,000 hours of
online collaborative problem solving, it is frequently a driving force (as discussed in Stahl, 2006d). It becomes
apparent to the participants that they are not understanding each other or do not know what references are pointing
to. The participants gradually make more explicit what they mean or the object of their references, using various
available resources in their environment or their communication media. Eventually, each participant acknowledges
that they understand the others, at least well enough to continue what they were doing before they paused to repair
their mutual  confusion. Thus, the  nature  of collaborative  processes  work  to align individual interpretations   to a
gradually shared  meaning  that  is itself  co-constructed in   this process. In  this way, "group     cognition" is not
something  that exists somewhere    outside of the interaction, but   is a gradually  emerging accomplishment     of the
group discourse itself (Stahl, 2006b). It is also important to note that the collaborative meaning-making process that
produces  the  shared  group meaning   tends   to  produce   in parallel   individual  interpretations of this meaning.

                                                          654                                                   CSCL 2007
Accordingly,      when       the   individual    participants    later  leave    the  group,    the  understandings      of   the  group
accomplishment may remain available to the individuals and can be re-introduced by them in subsequent group
interactions.
          In our present excerpt, the students are responding to the feedback in the large text box in Figure 1, where
the facilitators wrote, "For session four, you could revisit a pattern you were working on before, in order to state
more clearly for other groups in the wiki (a) a definition of your problem, (b) a solution and (c) how you solved the
problem."     We    can   see  that  the   students    are oriented    to this feedback    because     line 1393   translates  it from   a
suggestion by the facilitators to the students ("you") into a summary by the students of what they ("we") should do.
The students are hesitant to post a statement of how they solved the problem on the wiki for others--including, of
course, for the facilitators who will be judging whether they are one of the best teams and deserving of a prize. So in
line 1394, they begin to go over their solution path together. But lines 1395 and 1396 do not continue this review;
they  return   to   line  1393    to agree   that  they   accomplished    parts  (a) and   (b).  It is ambiguous    what    line  1397   is
responding to. The line is continued (by the same participant) in line 1398. To understand this new line requires
recalling how the students solved the pattern problem in a previous session.
          Look    at  the    large diagram    in   Figure  1.  The   white  (empty)  squares    form   a diamond    pattern   of  width  5
squares.  The    red     (filled) squares   fill in   a  large  square  encompassing      the diamond,      by  adding  4   corners   each
composed of 3 red squares. One can compute the number of squares that it takes to form a diamond pattern by first
easily computing         the number     of squares    in  the  large encompassing     square    and  then   subtracting  the  number     of
squares   in  the   4 corners.    This   was  the   strategy  used   by the group    in a previous   session.   If we   now   look at  the
sequence of postings by Quicksilver, we see that they make sense as a response to Bwang's posting. Quicksilver is
taking   up  Bwang's      description,     recalling  that  the  square   was  formed   by adding      the  "corners"   and  then  further
specifying    the   strategy   as  treating   the   number    of  squares  in  a corner   as  being    part of  a  "triangular   number"
sequence. Meanwhile, Aznx's postings in lines 1395, 1396, 1399 and 1401 seem to form an independent sequence
of statements, focusing on the problem of step (c) from the feedback, explaining how the problem was solved. If we
follow the sequences of different students, they seem to be working in parallel, with Aznx despairing of explaining
the group solution path even while Bwang and Quicksilver are reviewing it.
          It is a well-known phenomenon that chat technology results in confusion because the turn-taking rules of
face-to-face conversation do not apply in chat. Participants type in parallel and the results of their typing do not
necessarily immediately follow the posting that they are responding to. When more than two people are chatting,
this  can produce     confusion      for the  participants    and  for  researchers  (Herring,   1999).    Moreover,    in an attempt    to
prevent postings from becoming too separated from their logical predecessors, people rush to post, often dividing
their messages      into   several   short  postings     and   introducing  many     shortcuts,  abbreviations,    typos,  mistakes    and
imprecision.   Technological         responses     to this problem   have   been  explored    (e.g.,   Fuks, Pimentel,     & de   Lucena,
2006). Analytically, it is important to begin a study of a chat record by reconstructing the threading and uptake
structure   of the    chat   log.  Threading     specifies  what   posting  follows   what    and   when    the structure  diverges   into
parallel  or  unrelated      threads  (Cakir    et  al.,  2005). The    uptake  structure  indicates   which    specific   elements   of a
posting, gesture, reference, drawing action, etc. are building upon previous elements (Suthers, 2006a).
          While Aznx (in lines 1395, 1396, 1399, 1401, 1403) and Quicksilver (in lines 1397, 1398, 1400, 1402)
seem to be following their own independent threads, there are also increasing signs of interaction between these
threads. While one is complaining that he (or she) does not know how to explain their solution path, the other is
demonstrating a way of systematically explaining, or at least enumerating, the path. Aznx' "Well, I can explain the
second formula" (line 1403) delimits his previous general statement that he could not explain their solution. Now he
is stating   that   he   can   explain     part  of   the  solution--possibly    the  part that   Quicksilver     (line 1402)     has  just
characterized as finding that the pattern of the corners followed the pattern of "triangular numbers" (from Pascal's
triangle, which       is relevant    to  many    pattern   problems).   So  line  1403    reacts  to Quicksilver's    1402    as  well   as
continuing from Aznx' own 1401. In chat, postings frequently continue a train of meaning making from the same
participant   as  well   as  responding     to   a recent  posting   by   another participant,   thereby    potentially  contributing    to
intersubjective meaning making.
          We have already seen that new postings do not only relate to previous postings. They also reference things
outside of the immediate chat discourse. For instance, line 1393 made reference to the feedback displayed in the text
box   in  the  shared    whiteboard.     It did    this  partially by   quoting  an  excerpt  from     the  feedback    and  partially by
transforming     it from     the  facilitator   perspective   to the   participants' perspective.    Line   1402   referred   to  Pascal's

                                                                     655                                                       CSCL 2007
triangle by using the phrase "triangular numbers" that the students had used before. Line 1403 refers to "the second
formula." The referent for this phrase is not obvious to the engaged participants or to us as retrospective analysts.
Quicksilver says "No" in line 1405. This seems to be a response to line 1403 about the second formula, with 1404
being a response to 1401 and to the general problem of preparing an explanation for the wiki.
         When   references become    unclear to some    members  of  the discourse, it may   be necessary to  repair the
breakdown in mutual understanding. A lot of important interaction in collaborative activities consists in such repair,
clarifying the references by  making   them  more  explicit so  that each participant  comes   to understand them well
enough to continue the discourse (Koschmann & LeBaron, 2003). Clark's contribution theory of grounding (Clark
& Brennan, 1991) describes how this takes place among dyads in face-to-face informal conversation, illustrated
with made-up examples. For online small groups using text chat in real examples of knowledge building, such as
explaining math problem solving, the repair may be more complicated.
         Quicksilver's "No" is followed by, "we don't know the second formula." The phrase, "second formula" in
line 1406 here is not referencing the same thing as "second formula" in line 1403, as indicated by the question mark
in line 1409. In fact, it takes two and a half minutes and 21 postings (1403 to 1424) to reach the point where the
discourse can go on. The confusion gets translated by line 1410 into which formula is this team's and which was
Team C's solution that this team found on the public wiki. Aznx tries to clarify (lines 1413-1416) that the formula
he is concerned with could not be Team C's because Team C did not calculate the number of squares using the
encompassing    big square   (they only  proposed  a formula   for the  number   of sticks).  Quicksilver describes  his
confusion, but the conversation does not continue; there is a one-minute silence, which is embarrassingly long in
chat.
         The silence is broken by Bwang's suggestion in line 1420 to use the graphical referencing tool that is part
of the   VMT   environment.  As they   wrap  up the  discussion, Quicksilver    points to one   formula ("ours") in  the
whiteboard (line 1422) and Aznx to the other ("theirs") (line 1424). This resolution of the confusion through the use
of the available technology was thus accomplished by all three of them, using the referencing tool to point to objects
in the whiteboard in coordination with labeling them with the terms "ours" and "theirs" in the chat. In parallel with
this, the students propose to move on to post on the wiki: Aznx suggests that they may be finished preparing the
explanation (line 1421). Quicksilver agrees, "all right, let's put it on the wiki and let's clearly explain it" (lines
1423, 1425). Finally, Aznx concludes the preparations by saying, "Bwang, you do it" (line 1426).
Ambiguity of the interaction
         We can follow the discussion taking place in the excerpt now better than at first sight. Not only do we have
some sense of its structure and flow, but we see how it is embedded in the situation of the preceding interactions,
the tasks that are driving the discourse forward, the items in the whiteboard and other available resources (wiki
postings by other teams, math knowledge, etc.). We had to conduct a preliminary analysis of the meaning-making
process in terms of the interactional threading, the uptake of one posting by a subsequent one, the continuity of
postings  by individual participants,   the subsidiary  discussions  to  repair confusions,   the references to various
resources and the repeated citation of terms or phrases. Only then could we look more deeply into the interaction or
investigate specific research questions.
         If we wanted to classify individual chat postings according to some coding scheme in order to compare our
excerpt to other interaction records, we would have had to do such a preliminary analysis to know what the brief,
elliptical chat postings meant. CSCL is a human science and the analysis of its data requires an understanding of the
meaning that things had for the participants. One cannot code a posting like "No!" as a mathematical proposal, a
repair of understanding, an argumentative move or an off-topic comment without having a sense of the meaning of
what the participants were doing linguistically and interactionally. Of course, if a chat posting just says, "Hi," then
even a simple algorithm can code it as Greeting, Social or Off-Topic with high reliability. However, we have found
that the most interesting interactions are challenging for experienced researchers and likely to inspire divergent but
productive analyses.
         So far our analysis of the excerpt is quite preliminary. There is still a lot of ambiguity about what is going
on. Line 1396/1399 remains quite intriguing: "We got the solutions. But I'm not sure how to explain how we got to
the solutions, although it makes perfect sense to me." If the solutions make perfect sense to Aznx, why does he feel
that  he cannot explain how   they  got  the solutions?  As  noted   above, this points   to a fundamental   problem  in
mathematics education. Students are trained to compute solutions, but they have difficulty articulating explanations.
Some   educational  theories point  to explanation   as the core  of  "deep understanding"     (Moss &  Beatty,  2006).

                                                           656                                                 CSCL 2007
Proponents of collaborative learning point to the importance of opportunities to explain math thinking to others as
being important even for the development of one's own higher-order learning skills (Wegerif, 2006).
          We may still wonder what the significance is of the fact that Aznx seems ready to post an explanation at
line 1421 despite his repeated disclaimer at line 1401. Does line 1421 signal that the ensuing interaction is being
taken as an adequate account or is the fact that things made perfect sense to Aznx now taken as adequate although it
was not previously? Aznx does say in line 1403 that he can explain "the second formula." Does this entail that all
that is needed is such an explanation of the second formula? Note that Aznx's line 1421 says, "So we're technically
done with all of it, right?" What does the "So" respond to as an uptake? What has suddenly made the group ready to
post an explanation? This line follows the extended effort to overcome the confusion of referencing, and it is hard to
trace the "So" back to some clear point that it is building on. Furthermore, what is the significance of the hedge,
"technically"? In fact it is not even clear what "it" refers to. Is Aznx just saying they are done with the repair, rather
than with the whole explanation? Line 1423/1425 with its "all right" response seems to take line 1421 as saying that
the group is ready to post their solution. It then proceeds to propose the logical next step, "let's put it on the wiki....
And let's clearly explain it." Aznx no longer resists, but in line 1426 he proposes that Bwang do the posting. In
previous sessions, Aznx has requested that Bwang do the wiki postings, using precisely the same wording. Bwang
has done previous wiki postings for the group. In this way, Aznx' statements leave ambiguous whether or not he
still expresses doubt about his ability to explain the group's solution path and the extent to which he indicates
understanding that path.
          It not only remains ambiguous how much Aznx can explain, but also what exactly he was referring to as
"the second formula." The repair of confusion shifted from distinguishing the second from the third formula to
distinguishing Team C's formula from Team B's. Quicksilver and Aznx clearly pointed to two different text boxes
in  the whiteboard  containing   formulae  as "ours"    and   "theirs." But the  text box  called  "ours"  contained three
formulae: for the big square, for the 4 corners and for the diamond pattern as the difference. Did Aznx originally
mean that he could only explain the second of these three--which was based on the formula for triangle numbers?
Did Quicksilver's mention of triangle numbers in line 1402 and more general review of their solution path help
Aznx to feel that they could put together an explanation of how all the formulae fit together? The discourse in this
excerpt does not seem to provide complete answers to some of these questions. While careful analysis of small
group discourse often reveals much about the problem-solving work of the group and its members, many other
issues remain ambiguous, missing and even contradictory. The group did its work without resolving or explicating
all of the issues that researchers may want to know about.
Methods of intersubjective meaning making
          We have seen that an understanding of the intersubjective meaning-making process of a small group in a
text-chat  environment    involves paying   attention   to an intricate  web   of connections   among   the items in   the
interaction record and items from the context that are made relevant in the discourse. There is a threading of the
flow, with a particular posting following up on a preceding one (that may not be immediately adjacent in the chat
log) and opening the possibility of certain kinds of postings to follow. There is up-take of one phrase or action by
another,  carrying the work   of   the group  ahead.    There are  often  important   continuities from one posting   of a
particular individual  to the same   person's subsequent      postings.  Various  sorts of communication    problems  can
arise--from typos to confusion--and repairs can be initiated to overcome the problems. Lines of chat can reference
items outside the chat, such as whiteboard drawings, formulae learned in the past or notions raised earlier. Terms
and phrases  in a  posting can serve   as citations  of  previous  statements,  making  the  former  meanings once   more
present and relevant. One could easily draw arrows on a record of the chat excerpt to indicate several dozen of these
connections  of threading,  uptake,    continuity, repair, reference and   citation. The postings   can be separated  into
columns by poster to reflect continuity (see Stahl, 2006d, p. 100), and a column added for referenced items external
to the immediate discourse. The intricate web of arrows would indicate how interwoven the postings are and how
the postings of the different  participants  are   tied together, creating  an overall  flow to the  group discourse. The
meaning of the interaction is co-constructed through the building of this web of contributions and consists in the
implicit network of references. The point is not to reify this network as the answer to the question, what is meaning,
but to see it as a way of understanding how meaning is co-constructed, i.e., how people make sense together.
          There are many methods that members of a group, community-of-practice or culture employ to accomplish
meaning-making moves in small-group interactions. In face-to-face interactions, certain typical "adjacency pairs"
(like question/answer or greeting/response) form common "member methods" (Garfinkel, 1967). In chat, the two
postings that belong to an adjacency pair may not be directly adjacent, but they retain the basic structure of forming

                                                             657                                                  CSCL 2007
a meaningful interaction through their combination. In looking at collaborative problem-solving extracts in VMT
logs, I defined a typical pattern of "math-proposal adjacency pairs" (Stahl, 2006d). Here, one participant proposes
an approach for the group to take to a problem or current sub-problem and someone else must either accept or
decline the proposal on behalf of the group. If it is declined, then some kind of argument or alternative proposal is
expected. If the proposal is accepted, then the group can continue working on the proposal, often by considering a
follow-up proposal pair. There are a number of conditions that must be met by a proposal for it to be successful.
These involve its timing and relevance in the flow of the discourse. A bid at a proposal that does not satisfy these
conditions is likely to fail to be taken up as a proposal. The bid/acceptance pair may be temporarily interrupted by
clarification questions or repairs to the bid's formulation. These, in turn, can lead to discussions of indeterminate
length. Math proposal adjacency pairs provide a social order for discussions of mathematical problems in small
groups. In the excerpt of Table 1, the students are no longer solving a math problem, but reflecting on their solution,
trying to recall the steps that they went through and to explain how they solved it in a way that will be meaningful
for an audience of their peers (the other teams who read the wiki) and their facilitators (who provide feedback and
judge the winning teams). Here, there is a similar process of making proposals and responding to them, but the
proposals are formulated more as declarative statements that recall past actions and the responses are rather oblique.
In addition, Quicksilver and Aznx tend to continue their presentations in multiple postings, creating parallel threads.
While there is an underlying social order that makes this excerpt meaningful, as we have seen it takes some analysis
to uncover this order.
         Even in this brief excerpt, we have seen many member methods or social practices that the participants use
to co-construct meaning. Mostly, they respond to each other, making suggestions and posing questions. In addition,
they work on repairing problems, such as the confusion about references to formulae. In resolving the confusion,
they called upon the referencing tool in the VMT environment. This was the equivalent for the online context of
pointing with a physical   gesture when  face-to-face.  Different media   provide   different affordances and impose
different constraints. In new media like this specific chat environment, participants have to be creative in adapting
traditional meaning-making methods or inventing new ones. Students may be very inventive and this may impose
extra effort on analysts who want to study the meaning-making processes and practices in innovative settings.
         The foregoing analysis of meaning making in the excerpt is purely preliminary. A fuller analysis would
depend upon one's research interests and specific questions. The excerpt would have to be understood within its
larger context, including: the four full sessions, which are being reflected on here; the feedback from the facilitators,
as it developed in response to the different sessions and based on the original task instructions; the various postings
to the whiteboard and to the wiki; and even some of the work of the other teams. But perhaps this preliminary
analysis is enough to indicate some of the methods of meaning making that take place in CSCL settings like the
VMT sessions. There are phenomena observable at many granularities of analysis. The interactions among brief
sequences of postings such as those in Table 1 may be considered the cell-form or elements of the meaning making
that underlies computer-supported collaborative learning.
Preconditions for cognitive processes by groups
         Now that we have a general sense of how meaning making takes place in CSCL (its conditions), what are
the implications for design? What do we need to consider when attempting to support effective meaning making in
CSCL?    One approach   to this question is to consider the   logical and practical preconditions for students to get
together and engage in joint meaning making to accomplish group cognitive tasks. In philosophical terms, this is to
specify the preconditions for the possibility of group cognition. Based on our empirical experiences in the VMT
project, here is a tentative list of some necessary--though not sufficient--preconditions for small groups of students
to collaborate on math problems and other high-order cognitive tasks. The particular number, order and description
of these preconditions is, of course, open to debate, extension and refinement. Nevertheless, it may be helpful to
consider them when organizing CSCL environments and activities. Here are some preconditions (with examples
from the analyzed excerpt):
1.  Intersubjectivity. Participants must be willing and able to interact with others as peers. They must recognize
    others as active subjects with their own agency and be willing to relate to them as such. (human sociability)
2.  Opening of interaction space. There must be a "world" in which people can come together and interact. The
    world must provide a network of meanings and possibilities for action. This situation defines deictic (Hanks,
    1992), semiotic and semantic relations. (a virtual world, such as those created in the VMT project)
3.  Object of activity. There must be a reason for interacting, a goal to work for, a topic to discuss, a problem to
    solve or an outcome to reach. (the math topic and motivating context)

                                                          658                                                 CSCL 2007
4.  Shared  intentionality.   It must be  possible   for participants  to orient   in  common     to objects, to  focus   their
    comments and activities on the same items, to "be-there-together" at a topic of joint concern, to "construct and
    maintain a shared conception of a problem." (e.g., the students' focus on the same formulae and tasks)
5.  Historical interpretive horizon. Meanings of artifacts, words, domain concepts, etc. evolve through history and
    local pasts. Participants must have lived histories that overlap enough to share understandings of historically
    evolved meanings. (the term "triangular numbers" brought in from classroom background experience)
6.  Shared  background     culture.   Participants must    share  a language,    a set  of member     methods,    a vast  tacit
    background knowledge of domain information and of ways of being human. (including how to "do" math)
7.  Member methods for social order. Participants inherit and are socialized into an endless variety of member
    methods for conducting interaction and creating social order. However, small groups must also constantly adapt
    and enact  methods     to meet   unique   situations and  innovative  technologies.    New    methods    must   be  fluidly
    negotiated and adopted for shared use in situ. (such as pointing from a chat message)
8.  Designed affordances of infrastructure. The technological features of a CSCL medium define many features of
    the world  which    is opened    up for   interaction. These    features are   enacted by the    participants   to provide
    affordances for their activities. The enacted affordances are often quite different from the features imagined by
    the designers and can only be discovered through analysis of actual usage. (e.g., the pointing tool)
9.  Dialogic   inter-animation    of perspectives.   A   key  source  of  creativity,   meaning   making,    problem-solving
    vitality--but  also    ambiguity--is   the   interaction  of    participants   with essentially   different   interpretive
    perspectives  (Wegerif,   2006).  The   power  of  CSCL    is largely dependent     upon  its ability  to bring    different
    perspectives together effectively. (Bwang's math skills, Aznx' questioning, Quicksilver's recall)
10. Creation & interpretation of group meaning. The meaning-making process discussed in this paper lies at the
    core of computer-supported collaborative learning. It must be supported by CSCL environments. (pointing)
11. Group-regulation & group meta-cognition. Small groups of learners working on wicked problems that have no
    fixed solution path    must  have methods    for proposing,   negotiating,   discussing, adopting    and  reflecting upon
    their path of inquiry. Methods of explaining their work are part of this. Scripting and other forms of scaffolding
    may help groups develop skills of self-regulation. (feedback about reflection on what to post to the wiki)
12. Individual learning    &   interpretation. The   establishment    of  shared   group   meanings    takes  place    through
    interactive processes like those we have noticed in this paper, involving the contribution of proposal bids by
    individual participants and the interpretation of meanings from individual perspectives (Stahl, 2006b, Ch. 16).
    Individual learning may result indirectly from the group cognitive processes that establish understanding by all
    participants. (the wiki posting done by Bwang later)
13. Motivation  and  engagement.      Small groups   and   communities-of-practice      determine    their own  interests and
    involvements   through    the particulars of what    they work   on  and  how   they   approach  it.   Individuals tend to
    become caught up in the group process through their contributions and participations in the interactions. Small-
    group processes appeal to the social inclinations of people, although they can also engender fears and pressures.
    In  groups of several   participants, the  interactions  can  become  quite    complex,  and  engagement     by    different
    individuals in different activities may ebb and flow. (Bwang kept quiet, but entered strategically)

        This   paper has   identified several  interaction   methods  and    group-cognitive  processes    that contribute  to
meaning making in CSCL settings. The interactions that constitute shared meaning are the elements of collaborative
learning--as the co-construction of shared understanding, which includes individual interpretation. A number of
preconditions for such interaction have also been proposed. An understanding of the conditions and preconditions
of the small-group meaning-making process may aid in the design and analysis of CSCL activities.
References
Cakir, M., Xhafa, F., Zhou, N., & Stahl, G. (2005). Thread-based analysis of patterns of collaborative interaction in
    chat. Paper presented at the international conference on AI in Education (AI-Ed 2005), Amsterdam, NL.
Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. Resnick, J. Levine & S. Teasley (Eds.),
    Perspectives on socially-shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: APA.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative learning.
    In P. Reimann & H. Spada (Eds.), Learning in humans and machines: Towards an interdisciplinary learning
    science (pp. 189-211). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Fuks, H., Pimentel, M., & de Lucena, C. J. P. (2006). R-u-typing-2-me? Evolving a chat tool to increase
    understanding in learning activities. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning
    (ijCSCL), 1 (1), 117-142. Retrieved from http://ijcscl.org/_preprints/volume1_issue1/fuks_pimentel_lucena.pdf.

                                                             659                                                     CSCL 2007
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Hanks, W. (1992). The indexical ground of deictic reference. In C. Goodwin & A. Duranti (Eds.), Rethinking
   context: Language as an interactive phenomenon. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Herring, S. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 4 (4).
Hutchins, E. (1996). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kilpatrick, J., Hoyles, C., Sokovsmose, O., & Valero, P. (Eds.). (2005). Meaning in mathematics education. New
   York, NY: Springer.
Koschmann, T. (1999). Meaning making: Special issue. Discourse Processes, 27 (2).
Koschmann, T. (2002). Dewey's contribution to the foundations of CSCL research. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer
   support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community: Proceedings of CSCL 2002 (pp. 17-
   22). Boulder, CO: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Koschmann, T., & LeBaron, C. (2003). Reconsidering common ground: Examining Clark's contribution theory in
   the operating room. Paper presented at the European Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (ECSCW '03),
   Helsinki, Finland. Proceedings pp. 81-98.
Koschmann, T., & Zemel, A. (2006). Optical pulsars and black arrows: Discovery's work in 'hot' and 'cold'
   science. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2006), Bloomington,
   IN. Proceedings pp. 356-362.
Moss, J., & Beatty, R. A. (2006). Knowledge building in mathematics: Supporting collaborative learning in pattern
   problems. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 1 (4), 441-466.
Mühlpfordt, M., & Stahl, G. (2007). The integration of synchronous communication across dual interaction spaces.
   Paper presented at the international conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2007),
   New Brunswick, NJ. Retrieved from http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/vmt/muehlpfordt.doc.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In C.
   O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-supported collaborative learning (pp. 69-197). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Stahl, G. (2006a). Analyzing and designing the group cognitive experience. International Journal of Cooperative
   Information Systems (IJCIS), 15, 157-178. Retrieved from
   http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/pub/ijcis.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2006b). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT
   Press. Retrieved from http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/mit/.
Stahl, G. (2006c). Supporting group cognition in an online math community: A cognitive tool for small-group
   referencing in text chat. Journal of Educational Computing Research (JECR) special issue on Cognitive tools
   for collaborative communities, 35 (2), 103-122. Retrieved from
   http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/pub/jecr.pdf.
Stahl, G. (2006d). Sustaining group cognition in a math chat environment. Research and Practice in Technology
   Enhanced Learning (RPTEL), 1 (2), 85-113. Retrieved from
   http://www.cis.drexel.edu/faculty/gerry/pub/rptel.pdf.
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T., & Suthers, D. (2006). Computer-supported collaborative learning: An historical
   perspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 409-426). Cambridge,
   UK: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers, D. D. (2006a). A qualitative analysis of collaborative knowledge construction through shared
   representations. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning (RPTEL), 1 (2), 1-28. Retrieved
   from http://lilt.ics.hawaii.edu/lilt/2006/Suthers-2006-RPTEL.pdf.
Suthers, D. D. (2006b). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL.
   International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 1 (3), 315-337.
Wegerif, R. (2006). A dialogical understanding of the relationship between CSCL and teaching thinking skills.
   International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 1 (1), 143-157.

Acknowledgments
The ideas in this paper are indebted to many sources, most directly to the team of the VMT project at the Math
Forum and Drexel. Detailed documentation of the VMT session: mathforum.org/wiki/VMT?VMTGroupB. The idea
of preconditions of possibility for interaction was suggested by Rupert Wegerif in a discussion at Intermedia in
Oslo. The theoretical and methodological focus on joint meaning making has prospered through interactions with
Tim Koschmann and Dan Suthers, most recently in workshops at Freiburg and Tübingen. The research reported
here was supported in part by grants to the author from the NSF programs for digital library services (NSDL),
innovative technologies (ITR/IERI) and the science of learning (SLC).

                                                         660                                               CSCL 2007
