                                 Drawing on Practices for Modeling
                                           Socio-Technical Systems

                                               Heidrun Allert, Christoph Richter,
                  Research Group Knowledge Media, Upper Austrian University of Applied Sciences,
                                        Softwarepark 11, A-4232 Hagenberg, Austria,
                                     {heidrun.allert;christoph.richter}@fh-hagenberg.at

        Abstract: The formal description of pedagogical scenarios and learning processes has attracted a
        lot of attention among researchers and developers in recent years. Nevertheless current modeling
        approaches resemble the notion of workflows and hence fall short in describing the situated and
        socially mediated nature of practice. Against this background the paper describes an alternative
        modeling approach as well as its theoretical foundation and practical implications.

Introduction
        The    formal    description    of pedagogical   scenarios     and  learning   processes   has resulted    in a  couple  of
specifications focusing on individual as well as collaborative activities. The explicit and formal representation of
educational processes is relevant for quite diverse reasons. Besides their technical and economic relevance they also
provide a  tool   of  communication     as    they allow to    share  experiences   and   to  coordinate activities   among    those
involved in the design and development process. Furthermore they are of interest for learning scientists as they
provide a  frame   of  reference    for the   analysis and  comparison     of   different scenarios.  While   current    educational
modeling languages such as IMS Learning Design (IMS, 2003) overcome the problem of de-contextualized learning
objects by describing the use of these objects within a unit of study, they resemble traditional workflow models and
hence reproduce the problem on a higher level. Even though these approaches acknowledge the complex nature of
learning processes they are reductive (the educational process equals the sum of the learning activities entailed).
Thereby the situated and socially mediated character of human action is neglected. Against this background this
paper outlines an alternative modeling approach which draws on activity theoretical as well as systemic theories to
depict practices.  The     paper is  structured    as follows:  Key    assumptions    of  the cultural-historical  activity   theory
(Leontjew, 1978) as well as the Theory of Social Systems (Luhman, 1995) are introduced to outline the underlying
rationale of the modeling approach. Referring to the theoretical foundations the modeling approach is presented. In a
further work the modeling approach is presented in details and the practical implications are discussed.

The Concept of Practice
        The concept of practice can be defined as "the ways of doing work, grounded in tradition and shared by a
group of workers" (Bødker, 1991). While the concept of practice can basically be defined as a customary way of
doing  things, it seems    worthwhile      to have  a  closer  look   at  this concept from   a  theoretical  point   of view.  The
following is   a list of   key-assumption     on human-activity       and social systems.    Here  we  state, that the   concept of
activity systems and social systems hold common assumptions.

        Key assumptions of activity theory (AT): AT is a philosophical framework and descriptive tool focusing on
understanding    human     activity and  work    practices. It  is based   upon  the  psychological   theory  of  A.  N.  Leontjew
(1978) and L. S. Vygotsky (1978). (1) Human activity is object-oriented, i.e. it is directed towards a physical or
conceptual object     that is transformed     by the  activity. It is  the object  of an  activity and not    the goal   that allows
distinguishing   different  activities  from   one another.    Artifacts  are  not objects   by themselves,   but  can   become  an
object of activity when they are targeted and transformed in the course of an activity. The difference between an
artifact in the sense of a real entity and the object of an activity is crucial as one and the same artifact can be used for
a multitude of different purposes in different activities, while the object of activity is unique for every activity. (2)
Activities are always mediated by tools and signs, which are constitutive elements of the activity system. Tools and
signs are mediators which range from physical to conceptual artefacts (e.g. knives, plans, spreadsheets, scientific
theories, and languages). Tools capture and preserve the socially shared knowledge developed in a given community
and mediate the subjects' relation with the object of the activity as well as with other human beings (cp. Leontjew,
1978; Stahl, 2003). (3) Human activity whether carried out individually or collectively cannot be detached from its
social context as its meaning is bound to its interpretation within a collective. (4) Activities are shaped by contextual
conditions and circumstances. Human activity has to continuously adapt its actions and operations to external events

                                                                   66                                                     CSCL 2007
and  circumstances. As   a consequence    human   activity  is  guided  but  not predefined    and determined     by plans
(Bardram, 1997). (5) The relationship between subjects, objects, and tools is reciprocal. The elements within an
activity system are mutually interdependent, which means that a change in one of them will inevitably alter the other
ones. In this sense the constituents of an activity form a system where each component is defined in relation to the
other components. (6) According to Leontjew (1978) three levels of activity can be distinguished, namely collective
activities which are carried out on a communal level often involving multiple actors, actions that are performed by a
single subject to achieve a certain goal relevant to the collective activity, and operations in the form of fine grained
automated routines. But even though activities are structured hierarchically Leontjew notes that the relation between
operations and actions as well as actions and activities is not an additive one. Therefore it is not possible to simply
decompose   an  activity into a  set of actions. The    difference between   a  set of actions and  an   activity is not a
quantitative but a qualitative one. (7) Practices are never static but evolve when contradictions or tensions emerge
between the elements in an activity system. Due to the systemic nature of practices changes in one element or the
relation between elements   usually  affect the  entire system.  Due   to their dynamic   nature practices are    historical
entities in the sense that they change and develop in time.

         Key assumptions of the Theory of Social Systems (TSS): TSS (Luhmann, 1995) is a descriptive framework
presenting a system-centered view and a non-deterministic and non-prescriptive meta-theory. It is a variant of the
General System Theory (e.g. Parsons, 1951). Parsons (1951) argues that societies as well as biological organisms
aim at homeostasis (maintaining a stable state), and that their parts can be understood only in terms of the whole. (1)
The  difference system/environment    is the central paradigm.     The TSS   describes   the world in terms of    systems,
drawing a difference between a system and its environment. Whereas e.g. in object-oriented modeling objects and
categories are defined, the TSS states that the difference system/environment is constructed. "The central paradigm
of recent system theory is 'system and environment'. The concepts of function and functional analysis no longer
refer to 'the system' (...) but to the relationship between system and environment." (Luhmann, 1995). The difference
system/environment is not ontological but an epistemological. "This leads to a radical de-ontologizing of objects as
such (...). This interpretation contains no unambiguous localization of any sort of 'items' within the world, nor any
unambiguous classifying relation between them." (Luhmann, 1995). (2) Personal systems as well as social systems
are meaning processing systems as they are processing information by constructing meaning. A social system is not
the group of people it contains. The social system is of different quality as there are different levels of emergence.
Meaning is processed according to the actual state and current structure of the system and is defined by the system
itself. (3) Persons (personal systems) do not belong to a social system but to its environment (Luhmann, 1995). This
means, a person (and any other entity/type) does not belong to a system for all intents and purposes but in some
respect, filling a specific role. Thus, a system can not determine another. (4) Elements within a system generate each
other, e.g. in listening, the audience creates the speaker and vice versa. (5) Systems organize their inner complexity
and reduce contextual (environmental) complexity. Systems are closed and self-regulated. Processes are inherently
in-determined from an observer's point of view.

Modeling (Knowledge) Practices as Coherent Social Systems
         This section outlines a modeling approach for modeling socio-technical systems. As this paper rethinks the
epistemological foundation    of modeling   socio-technical systems,   the  approach   goes  beyond   specifying  specific
concepts and relations and addresses the meta-level of modeling. The approach is based on three major inputs. (1)
Distinguishing the meta-level categories natural     type from role       type to distinguish between an object and its
role within a specific context/system    (Guarino et al., 1994;    Steimann, 2000),  (2)  introducing a  system-centered
perspective to  reduce   complexity  and to  model   elements   which  generate     each other within  a system    (n-ary
relations), and (3) integrating basic assumptions of AT in order to overcome shortcomings of workflow models
which work as means-end-models (different levels        of  emergence). Guarino et al. (1994) provide an ontological
distinction, separating the meta-level categories role    types from natural        types. This distinction is based on
the meta-properties identity and rigidity. Natural types (types) are semantically rigid (an instance of a class once and
forever belongs to that class; it cannot change it without loosing its identity) and not founded. Role types (roles) are
not semantically rigid (instances of types can fill, adopt and leave a role without loosing their identity) but founded
(defined by context and relation). In figure 1 a rectangle indicates a type, a circle indicates a role, e.g. an instance of
the type artifact fills the role tool within a specific context/system. Guarino et al. (1994) and Steimann (2000) define
the meta-level category role     type (role) as a binary relation. A role is defined by its relation to another role. We
state, that roles within a system are reciprocal and mutually interdependent as elements within a system generate
each other. Thus, this work models action and activity as      n-ary   relation. Furthermore, action and activity are

                                                            67                                                  CSCL 2007
modeled on different levels      of emergence. The modeling approach takes into account several key assumptions
of AT and the TSS and has practical implications: (1) Activities (such as learning) are contextualized (distinguishing
between role- and type-based attributes of the entities involved). (2) Activities can not be de-composed and reduced
to a chain of actions without a loss of information (the relation operations/actions as well as actions/activity is not an
additive one). Current modeling languages treat activities as self-contained entities related to other activities via
respective pre-  and post-conditions   (organized   hierarchically, sequentially or in parallel). (3) The    elements of a
system generate each other reciprocally. It is important to note that the model described so far is a meta-model
providing  the semantics   but not  the   syntax of a  respective   modeling  language. Accordingly      the aim is not  to
demonstrate the practical utility of a particular modeling language but the general implications of the meta-model
proposed. Further work is to be done in specifying a modeling language (based on the meta-model presented in this
paper) to describe practices and socio technical systems in the field of CSCL and CSCW.

          Figure 1: The meta-model of a system-centered role-based modeling approach, in UML.

References
Bardram,   J. E. (1997).   Plans as Situated  Action.  Proceedings    of  the 5th European   Conference      on  Computer
         Supported Cooperative Work, Lancaster, UK. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bødker, S. (1991). Activity Theory as a Challenge to Systems Design. In: H.E. Nissen, H. Klein, R. Hirschheim
         (eds.). Information Systems Research (pp. 551­564). Amsterdam, North Holland: Elsevier.
Guarino,  N.,  Carrara, M.,  Giaretta, P. (1994).   An ontology   of meta-level  categories. In:  D.  J. E.  Sandewall,  P.
         Torasso   (eds.): Principles  of Knowledge    Representation  and   reasoning  (pp  270-280).   San  Mateo,  CA:
         Morgan Kaufmann.
IMS Global Learning Consortium (2003). IMS Learning Design Specification, V. 1.0, http://www.imsglobal.org
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social Systems. Stanford, CA: Stanford University press.
Leontjew, A. N. (1978). Activity, Consciousness, and Personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Stahl, G.  (2003). Meaning    and Interpretation  in  Collaboration.  In: B.  Wasson,  S. Ludvigsen,     U.  Hoppe  (eds.):
         Designing for Change in Networked Environments (pp 523-532). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Steimann, F. (2000). Modellierung mit Rollen. Hannover: Universität Hannover.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Acknowledgments
The KP-Lab     Integrated   Project is  sponsored   under the   6th   EU   Framework    Programme     for    Research and
Development. The authors are solely responsible for the content of this article. It does not represent the opinion of
the KP-Lab consortium or the European Community, and the European Community is not responsible for any use
that might be made of data appearing therein.

                                                            68                                                    CSCL 2007
