Collaborative Argumentation and Cognitive Processing - An Empirical
Study in a Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning Environment

                                Karsten Stegmann, Christof Wecker, Armin Weinberger, Frank Fischer
                              Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 Munich, Germany
              Email: {karsten.stegmann | christof.wecker | armin.weinberger | frank.fischer}@psy.lmu.de

        Abstract:      It   has been     assumed      that deep   cognitive    processing    is   associated    with   better
        understanding.       Better  understanding      of   the content    is  supposed    to   improve    the  quality   of
        argumentation       in  the discussions.    Although     plausible, empirical   tests  of these  assumptions     are
        sparse. Therefore, the goals of this study are to examine these assumptions and to provide analyses
        of    cognitive     processes    during    collaboration.  A    one-factorial   design    with   forty-eight    (48)
        participants was used to investigate the relation between the formal quality of single arguments
        (low vs. high) during online discussions of groups of three, cognitive processes, and knowledge
        acquisition.   The     formal    quality   of single  arguments     was    fostered by   means    of   a computer-
        supported     collaboration     script. Empirical    evidence   was  found   that the   quality  of argumentative
        knowledge construction during discussion is positively related to deep cognitive processing and
        that  the   scripted    construction     of   single arguments      had a   positive   effect  on   the  individual
        acquisition of knowledge on argumentation.

Collaborative Argumentation in Asynchronous Online Discussions
        Several   studies    in the  field of   Computer-Supported      Collaborative     Learning    aim   to  foster the  quality of
argumentation in discussions of learners in order to enhance individual knowledge acquisition (e.g., Andriessen et
al., 2003; Jermann & Dillenbourg, 2003; Kollar et al., 2005; Kuhn & Goh, 2005). These approaches assume that
explicit, high-quality argumentation is related to better cognitive processing and thus, to knowledge acquisition of
the individual learner (e.g., Baker, 2003; Kuhn et al., 1997). Although plausible, empirical evidence for this set of
interconnected claims is very rare. Therefore, this contribution aims to investigate the relations between the quality
of argumentation in online discussions, cognitive processing, and knowledge acquisition.

        Asynchronous online discussions have been considered as an appropriate context for learners to engage in
high-quality  argumentation     and   deep   cognitive     processing (Kuhn     &  Goh,   2005;   Marttunen      & Laurinen,   2001).
However, learners rarely use this advantage of asynchronous communication (e.g., Marttunen et al., in press). An
instructional approach      aiming   to  support    the processes    of argumentative     knowledge      construction    is based   on
computer-supported collaboration scripts. Collaboration scripts specify and sequence learning activities and assign
roles to different learners (Kollar et al., 2006). Thereby they can facilitate specific discourse activities such as the
construction  of arguments.     In  this paper     we examine    the  assumptions    of argumentative     knowledge      construction
about the   relations  between      the  quality   of argumentation,    the    depth of   cognitive   processing,    and   knowledge
acquisition. We therefore assess both the individual cognitive processes and the quality of argumentation in online
discussion, which   is fostered     (and thereby    experimentally    manipulated)   by   means   of  an argumentative      computer-
supported collaboration script.

Argumentative Knowledge Construction
        By    "argumentative     knowledge         construction"  we    refer   to the  joint    construction    and   the  individual
acquisition of knowledge through collaborative argumentation (cf. Andriessen et al., 2003). Argumentative dialogue
that may foster argumentative knowledge construction is likely to occur in collaborative learning when two or more
individuals  try to find    a  solution  for    an authentic  problem    (e.g., de   Grave    et al., 2001).   Some    studies  report
substantial relations between argumentative structures in learners' discourse and individual knowledge acquisition
(Baker, 2003; Chinn et al., 2000; Kuhn et al., 1997; Leitao, 2000).

        The construction of single arguments can be described against the background of Toulmin's (1958) model
of argumentation.   In    a simplified   version   of Toulmin's    model,   arguments     may    comprise   the  components    claim,
grounds, and qualifications. The claim is an expression of the position that is advanced in the argument. Under the
term grounds we subsume the elements data, warrant, and backing from Toulmin's model. A datum is constituted

                                                                  661                                                       CSCL 2007
by factual information that favors the acceptance of the claim. A warrant is a rule of inference that justifies the
transition from the datum to the claim and reveals the relevance of the data for the claim, such as theoretical laws or
definitions. A  backing   is factual   information   such   as statistics   or expert   opinions   that provides a   rationale for  a
warrant. Like the supporting elements of Toulmin's model, also Toulmin's qualifier and its associated rebuttal can
be  conflated.  We   suggest    the heading    qualifications  for    these elements.     The  so-called   qualifier marks    limited
certainty of the claim and is usually constituted by a modal adverb such as "perhaps" or "probably". The qualifier is
directly dependent on the so-called rebuttal that specifies states of affairs that would weaken or invalidate the claim.
According to our simplified model, a completely explicit argument would comprise a claim supported by grounds
and limited by qualifications. Hence, the formal quality of single arguments can be described on the basis of this
simplified model.

           The explicit formulation of grounds such as data and warrant (Baker, 2003) and the explicit consideration
of alternative viewpoints (Spiro & Jehng, 1990) are regarded as being related to deep cognitive processes that foster
knowledge construction. In addition, the participation includes active reception of arguments, too. The confrontation
with new    ideas  or  different  positions    might challenge    the  own     position.   Completely   explicit arguments     could
facilitate the  evaluation   of  grounds    and   qualifications,     while bare    claims   may   rather  hinder    deep   cognitive
processing. Hence, deep cognitive processing could be related to both by the production and the reception of high-
quality  arguments.    A  crucial   type of cognitive    processing    with    regard   to knowledge     construction   is  cognitive
elaboration (McNamara et al., 1996). Cognitive elaboration is the enrichment of learning material using additional
information taken from or inferred in combination with prior knowledge. Hence, arguments of high formal quality
with respect to argumentative knowledge construction should be associated with deeper cognitive elaboration. There
is ample   evidence    that  deep   cognitive  elaboration     of the  learning     material   is causally  related  to  knowledge
acquisition (e.g., Stein & Bransford, 1979). In problem-oriented learning environments, argumentative knowledge
construction is supposed to foster, in the first place, the ability to use theoretical concepts and their interrelations to
analyze and solve complex problems (Bransford et al., 1989), i.e., application-oriented, domain-specific knowledge.
Additionally, there is empirical evidence that participation in high-quality argumentative discussions may foster the
acquisition  of knowledge    on   argumentation     (cf. Kuhn,    1991).    This comprises     knowledge    of the   components    of
arguments described above and on how to construct arguments that consist of the components claim, grounds and
qualifications (i.e., knowledge on the construction of single arguments). For these kinds of knowledge acquisition to
occur it is regarded as crucial that the argumentation in the discourse among the learners is of high-quality. It has
been demonstrated that computer-supported collaboration scripts can facilitate specific processes such as the ones
that are assumed to be related to knowledge acquisition in argumentative knowledge construction (e.g., Weinberger
et al., 2005a).

Effects of Computer-Supported Collaboration Scripts on Argumentative
Knowledge Construction
           The approach of computer-supported collaboration scripts to support online discussions took its inspiration
from scripted cooperation (see O'Donnell, 1999, for an overview). Collaboration scripts are instructional plans that
specify  and   sequence   individual   and  collaborative   learning     activities  that  are associated   with deeper     cognitive
processing   and  thereby   facilitate knowledge    acquisition.  The    various   activities  may  also   be assigned   to different
learners   who  then   take  different   roles (Palincsar   &    Brown,   1984;     for an  overview    see   Kollar et  al., 2006).
Computer-supported       asynchronous    online   discussions  provide    two   important   opportunities   for  the application   of
collaboration   scripts. First, in  asynchronous     settings  they   provide   learners   with   the opportunity    to perform    the
activities required by the script at their individual pace. Second, in computer supported collaborative learning scripts
can easily be implemented in the graphical user-interface of the collaboration tool (e.g. Baker & Lund, 1997; Hron
et al., 1997). Learners do not need to split their attention between what they discuss (e.g. a case analysis) and the
instructions about which activities they are supposed to perform (e.g. to construct arguments containing grounds).
Therefore, computer-supported collaboration scripts are typically implemented as prompts (e.g. Weinberger, 2003),
buttons (e.g. Hron et al., 1997), or input text fields (Kollar et al., 2005).

           Weinberger et al. (2005b) designed a computer-supported collaboration script for argumentative knowledge
construction   in problem-based     learning   in a  higher education     setting.  It  was designed    to improve   the   quality of
single  arguments   in online   discussions    by providing    a  set of text  windows     and  related  prompts  for   the different
components of a completely explicit argument, i.e., an argument consisting of a claim, grounds and qualifications. In
an  empirical   study,   Weinberger     et al.  (2005b)   found    evidence     that   the script  fostered   both   the  quality  of

                                                                 662                                                        CSCL 2007
argumentation   in  online   discussions   and   the  individual    acquisition   of  knowledge        about   argumentation.    The
individual acquisition of domain-specific knowledge (on Weiner's attribution theory in this case) was not affected.
The  authors  explained   this pattern  of findings  by  learners'  limited   cognitive    resources:  The   time  to  acquire both
knowledge    on argumentation     and  domain-specific     knowledge     was  restricted   to 80  minutes    in this  experimental
study. This  required  the learners  to allocate  a  considerable   part   of their cognitive    capacity   to the construction   of
knowledge    on    argumentation   and  accordingly     left little resources    for  enhanced      domain-specific      knowledge
acquisition. Thus, the study showed that argumentative computer-supported collaboration scripts are feasible means
to  foster the  quality   of   argumentation   in   online   discussions   as    well as   the   acquisition    of knowledge      on
argumentation, while at the same time it did not appear to impede domain-specific knowledge acquisition. Hence,
this setting seems  suitable   to examine   to what   extent  the   quality   of argumentation      is positively  related  to deep
cognitive  processing.  The  study  presented  here  can   be regarded     as a  follow up    to the study   by Weinberger     et al.
(2005). This paper aims to examine the relation between high quality argumentative discussions and the depth of
cognitive processing more closely.

Research Questions
         The following research questions were examined:
         (1) To what extent does the scripted construction of single arguments affect the quality of argumentation
and  the depth  of  cognitive  elaboration    during argumentative     knowledge      construction?    In  line with   the study  of
Weinberger et al. (2005b) we expect that the scripted construction of single arguments has a positive effect on the
formal  quality of  single arguments.   Moreover,    we    expect   that learners   supported    by  the scripted  construction   of
single arguments engage in deeper cognitive elaboration than learners without support of the script.

         (2) To what extent is the quality of argumentation related to the depth of cognitive elaboration? We expect
a positive relation between the formal quality of the learning partners' argumentation and the depth of cognitive
elaboration and that the effect of the scripted construction of single arguments on the depth of cognitive elaboration
is mediated by the formal quality of the learning partners' argumentation. Furthermore, we expect a positive relation
between the depth of cognitive elaboration and the formal quality of the learner's argumentation as well as that the
effect of the scripted construction of single arguments on the quality of the learner's own argumentation is mediated
by the depth of his or her cognitive elaboration.

         (3)  To   what extent    does  scripted  construction  of     arguments    foster the   acquisition   of  domain-specific
knowledge and knowledge on argumentation? Since we did not change the conditions of the experimental setting in
comparison to the study of Weinberger et al. (2005b), we expect that the scripted construction of single arguments
should have a positive effect on the acquisition of knowledge on the construction of single arguments and no further
effects on domain-specific knowledge acquisition.

Method
Participants, Design, Unit of Analysis, and Statistical Tests
         Forty-eight  (48)   students  of  Educational  Science     at the University   of  Munich       participated in this  study
during the winter term 2003/2004. The mean age of the participants was M = 22.77 (SD = 3.66) years. Participation
was  a  requirement   for  receiving   course  credit   in a  mandatory     introductory    course     for freshman    because    the
experimental   learning environment       was  part  of the  regular     curriculum.  The     experimental     session  covered   an
important  theory  (Weiner's   attribution theory;   Weiner,  1985)    and  was   a substitute   for   a three-hour   lecture in  the
course.  The   learning outcomes     of   the experimental    session,    however,    were    not   considered     in grading.   We
manipulated the variable "scripted construction of single arguments" (with vs. without) by means of a computer-
supported collaboration script for the construction of single arguments that will be described below. The participants
were randomly assigned to groups of three. The groups were then randomly assigned to one of the two experimental
conditions in this one-factorial design.

         We decided to take the individual learners as the unit of analysis because individual knowledge acquisition
is a main    point of interest  in this study  and   assumed    to  be   a consequence      of   individual  cognitive   processes.
However, learners in a group of three cannot be regarded as mutually independent, which can be considered as a
violation of the random sample prerequisite of statistical procedures. Hence, we randomly selected one learner per
group for this analysis, i.e. in the analysis each of the 16 groups is represented by one of its members.

                                                               663                                                         CSCL 2007
Material and the Collaborative Learning Task
          The  content   of   the learning environment    was  Weiner's  attribution  theory (1985)  and  its application  in
education. In an educational context, this theory can be used to explain the learning motivation of people on the
basis of the kinds of causes to which they themselves attribute success or failure. The students read a three-page
description of this theory.

          Three learning cases about practical contexts were used as a basis for online discussions in the collaborative
learning phase. Each case was close to reality, complex and allowed learners to construct different arguments based
on attribution theory.   The group's task was to analyze the three cases and to come up with a joint solution for each
case. The three students in each group were distributed over three laboratory rooms. An asynchronous, text-based
discussion  board  was   used     for collaboration. This discussion  board  allowed   the exchange  of  text messages    that
resembled emails. Learners could either start a new topic by posting a new message or reply to messages that had
been posted before. Each message consisted of a subject line, author information, date, time, and the message body.
While the learning environment set author information, date, and time automatically, the learners had to enter the
subject line and the body of the message. Each of the three cases was discussed on a separate discussion board, and
learners could switch between these boards at any time during the collaborative learning phase.

Implementation of the Scripted Construction of Single Arguments
          The  environment     allowed     for the  graphical implementation   of different  types of  computer-supported
collaboration   scripts. (1) The   control  group    received no additional  support  in solving the  three  problem  cases.
(2) The scripted construction of arguments was implemented in the CSCL interface as a graphical structure of input
text boxes that should help learners to construct single arguments (see Figure 3). The script, based on our simplified
version of  Toulmin's    model    (1958),  differentiates between    claim, grounds  and qualifications. The    learners were
asked  to fill in each   text box  of  the interface to construct  a completely explicit   argument. After  constructing  the
argument, they could add the argument to the message body by clicking on a command button ("add" button; see
Figure  1). This  triggered   the  event that  the  graphical structure was  translated by the system   into  a pre-specified
textual structure for the individual messages. Then, the learners could either construct a new argument with support
from  the graphical  structure    or  submit   the message. Non-argumentative    parts  of the message,  such   as questions,
comments or expressions of emotion could be inserted directly into the message body, without using the argument
construction script.

    Figure 1. The interface of the script for the construction of arguments. This extension was placed between the
     description of the cases and the regular user interface. It comprises input text fields for claim, grounds and
    qualifications. With a click on the add-button, the argument was pasted to the input text field of the regular
                              interface and the input text fields of the extension were cleared.

Procedure
          First, the participants completed pretests that were designed to measure domain-specific prior knowledge
and prior knowledge on argumentation. The data from these tests were used to control randomization. Subsequently,
the participants had 20 minutes to read the three-page description of attribution theory individually. After that, the
learners were introduced to the learning environment and to the think-aloud procedure. Then they collaborated for
80 minutes in groups of three, trying to develop solutions for the three cases and to reach agreement about them. In
the final phase   (about    45 minutes),    the  students took  individual  posttests on   domain-specific   knowledge    and
knowledge on argumentation. Time on task was held constant for the two conditions.

                                                               664                                                  CSCL 2007
Data Sources and Variables
         Quality of the construction of arguments. To assess the construction of arguments, the students' written
online discussions during the collaborative learning phase were analyzed by means of a segmentation and coding
procedure developed by Weinberger and Fischer (2006). Only the messages that referred to the case "Math" (about
1200 segments counted across all groups) were included in the analysis.

         The    discourse   corpora   were  segmented    by trained coders.  The    segmentation    was   based on propositional
units, i.e. the criterion for segmentation was to separate units that include concepts from attribution theory that could
be  evaluated   as true  or false. E.g.,  the sentence   "Michael   is attributing  internal and  stable."   was segmented     into
"Michael attributes internal" and "[Michael attributes] stable". With respect to the segmentation of the discourse
corpora, the coders achieved an agreement of 84% during the training.

         The segmented discussions were then analyzed for the construction of single arguments. With respect to the
construction of arguments, the coders had to distinguish between (1) bare claims, (2) supported claims, (3) limited
claims, and (4) supported and limited claims. Bare claims are neither explicitly supported by grounds, nor explicitly
limited  in their  claimed    validity  by  qualifications,  e.g. "Michael    attributes  as internal".   Supported    claims   are
assertions  for which    grounds   are provided.  In the  context   of this study,  learners    could support   their claims with
grounds  that   were   either   observations  from   the case   description  (data)  or  definitions,  laws  and   findings  from
research on attribution theory (warrants and backings), for example. Indicators for grounds that support claims are
conjunctions such as "because", "due to the fact that" etc., yet learners do not always explicitly connect reasons to
the corresponding claims. For instance, the claim "Michael attributes as internal" may be supported by the grounds
"Michael ascribes his failure to lack of talent." and "Ascribing failure to lack of talent is an internal attribution".
Limited  claims    are restricted  in their claimed  validity  by qualifications,   e.g. "[...] provided  that  Michael  tells  the
truth". Supported and limited claims are both accompanied by grounds and restricted by qualifications. Five trained
coders coded the online discussion. About 5% percent of the discourse data presented in this study were coded by all
five  coders. The    interrater agreement   computed     on the basis  of  these overlapping    codings   of the construction   of
single arguments was sufficiently high (median of Cohen's  = .70).

         The quality of the construction of arguments of the individual learner is a compound variable that was
defined as the amount of written arguments of one learner during the online discussions that were either supported
by grounds or limited by qualifications, or both in the argumentation of the learner. The quality of the construction
of arguments of the learning partners was determined in analogy to the previous variable, but only on the basis on
the  contributions   of  each   learner's two  partners, i.e.  as the  amount    of arguments    of  the  learning partners  with
grounds and/or qualifications.

         Depth of cognitive elaboration. The participants were asked to think aloud during the whole collaboration
phase. They were advised to articulate their thoughts without explaining or commenting on them. In each laboratory
room, an experimenter was seated together with the participant in order to ensure that the think-aloud procedure was
performed correctly. If necessary, the experimenter used one of the following sentences to advise the participant:
"Please keep on speaking!", "Please do not comment your thoughts!", or "Please do not explain your thoughts!" The
think-aloud protocols were recorded by the computer using a software that captures both the content of the computer
screen and the audio signals from the laboratory room simultaneously. The think-aloud protocols were broken down
into  segments    of ten seconds   of  duration.  Trained   coders  classified   each segment     of  the think-aloud   protocols.
"Cognitive elaboration" was coded when learners elaborated propositional units in which they applied concepts from
attribution theory.    Note that  these   propositional  units were    not provided   in the learning   material,  but had   to be
inferred by   the  learner. Experts   identified the propositional   units  that referred  the  case  "Math",   e.g., "Michael  is
attributing as internal", "The teacher is attributing as internal", or "The parents are attributing on missing ability".
The median of the agreement between the coders concerning the categorization was sufficiently high (Cohen's  =
.78).

         Following a line of argumentation introduced by Craik (2002), we operationalized the depth of cognitive
elaboration as the duration of cognitive elaboration per proposition. According to Craik, the duration of cognitive
processes can, under certain circumstances, be interpreted as an indicator of the depth of cognitive processing. The
depth of cognitive elaboration depends on several attributes of learners, learning material, and the learning task. For
example, learners with a high level of relevant prior knowledge process information faster than learners with a low
level of knowledge.      Different  learning  content   (e.g., reading  a  novel vs.  reading   a manual)    requires  a different

                                                                665                                                      CSCL 2007
processing time. Memorization takes an amount of time different from problem solving. Therefore, there cannot be a
general   objective index  of  depth of  cognitive  elaboration. Conversely,    however,   this means   that  the duration  of
cognitive  elaboration  by   similar learners with  similar prior knowledge     who  process    the  same  information    with
respect to the same task may allow for intersubjective comparisons of the depth of cognitive processing. Hence, all
learners  received  the    same   learning material with  the    same  task, and    only   freshmen   were    examined.   The
comparability of their prior knowledge was tested (see section "Randomization check").

          Tests of  domain-specific   knowledge.   Both the   pretest and the   posttest for the  measurement     of domain-
specific knowledge consisted of the task to analyze a problem case from a practical context. The participants had to
write  an analysis  based   on Weiner's    (1985) attribution theory  individually  on   a sheet  of paper and    received no
additional support. The case "Choosing a major" was used for the pretest and is about the influence of parents on
their daughter's choice of her major subject at the university. In the case "Text analysis", which was used for the
posttest, a student talks about the reasons of failing an exam in text analysis. Individual pretest and posttest were
analyzed   by means   of   a segmentation   (see  above for   segmentation   rules) and    coding  procedure   developed   by
Weinberger (2003):

          For the pretest experts identified propositional units in which theoretical concepts from attribution theory
are used to describe case information concerning the case "Choosing a major". The number of these propositional
units  in the pretest was    used as an  indicator for domain-specific    prior knowledge.    Due    to a floor   effect (most
participants did not apply concepts from attribution theory in the pretest), the reliability of the measurement was
rather low (Guttmann split-half, r = .42).

          For the posttest, experts identified propositional units in which theoretical concepts from attribution theory
are used to describe case information concerning the case "Text analysis". The number of different propositional
units that could be identified in a subject's analysis of the posttest case was used as a measure for his or her domain-
specific knowledge. The reliability was sufficient (Guttman split-half, r = .62).

          Tests of knowledge on the construction of arguments. In the pretest, prior knowledge on the construction of
arguments was operationalized as the amount of arguments in the individual analysis of the problem case that were
either supported or limited, or both, according to the segmentation and coding procedure that was described above
for the analysis of the students' discussions.

          In the posttest of knowledge on the construction of single arguments the participants were asked to recall
components of single arguments (claim, grounds, and qualifications). For the successful recall of each of the three
components they were credited one point. In addition, the participants were asked to formulate completely explicit
arguments about "smoking" that contained all of the components of the simplified Toulmin model. These arguments
were analyzed with respect to the components of a single arguments (claim, grounds, and qualifications). For each
of the three types of components that were appropriately contained in the students' responses they were credited one
point. Hence,   the   test scores  could   range  from 0 to   6  points.  Two   trained    coders rated   the knowledge    on
argumentation tests (Cohen's  = .83). The reliability coefficient was sufficiently high (Guttman split-half, r = .88).

Results
Randomization Check
          In order to control potential effects of interfering variables and to ensure that randomization was successful,
we compared a) the experimental conditions and b) unselected vs. selected individuals from the small groups with
respect to domain-specific prior knowledge and prior knowledge on argumentation. These tests were conducted on a
20 percent alpha-level to reduce the probability of type-II-errors. Because of the floor effect of domain-specific prior
knowledge, a Chi-square test was conducted with regard to this variable as well. Neither between the experimental
groups nor between selected vs. unselected individuals significant differences were found.

RQ1: Effects of the Scripted Construction of Single Arguments on the Formal Quality of
Single Arguments and the Depth of Cognitive Elaboration during Argumentative
Knowledge Construction
          The effects of the scripted construction of single arguments on the quality of the construction of single
arguments and the depth of cognitive elaboration of the learning material were tested.In the scripted construction of

                                                            666                                                      CSCL 2007
single arguments condition learners produce more then twice the amount of supported claims (M=11.88, SD=7.08)
than learners in  the   control   group  (M=5.38,    SD=5.76),    i.e. the  script   increases the   quality of  construction   of
arguments  substantially   (t(14) =   -2.02, p   < .05, d  =  1.01,    one-tailed).  This   finding  replicates the    findings of
Weinberger et al. (2005) and supports our expectations. The scripted construction of single arguments also increased
the depth  of cognitive  elaboration(M=31.51,        SD=16.68)     in  comparison    to  no  support   by  the  script (M=62.67,
SD=38.89). This effect was significant and large (t(14) = -2.05, p < .05, d = 1.04, one-tailed). This result is in line
with our expectations and the assumptions concerning argumentative knowledge construction.

RQ2: Relation between the Formal Quality of Single Arguments and the Depth of
Cognitive Elaboration
         With  regard   to RQ2    we   examined     two relations:  The    first is  the relation  between   the depth   of   their
cognitive  elaboration  of the    learning material  and   the quality   of the   learners'  own    single arguments    in online
discussion. The second is the relation between the quality of the single arguments of the learning partners and the
depth of the learners' cognitive elaboration of the learning material.

         As expected, the depth of the cognitive elaboration of the learning material is positively correlated with the
quality of a  learner's single    arguments   in the online  discussion,   i.e.  the deeper   the  cognitive elaboration   of   the
learning material, the  higher    the formal  quality   of single  arguments     of the  learner. This correlation  is  large and
significant (r = .64, N = 16, p < .05, one-tailed). A positive correlation that was not significant was found between
the formal quality of the single arguments of the learning partners and the depth of the individual learners' cognitive
elaboration (r = .44, N = 16, n.s., one-tailed).

         Additionally, we conducted two mediator analyses. If the variable examined actually mediates the effect of
the scripted construction  of  single  arguments,    no effect on   the residuals    or  an effect with  a considerable    smaller
effect size (i.e. at least a one third lower than the effect on the criterion itself) should be found (cf. Baron & Kenny,
1986). We tested the depth of the learners' cognitive elaboration of the learning material as a predictor of the quality
of their own single arguments in online discussion and the quality of the single arguments of the learning partners as
a predictor of the depth of the learners' cognitive elaboration of the learning material. The first regression analysis
predicts the formal quality of the learners' own single arguments on the basis of the depth of the learners' cognitive
elaboration and explains a large proportion of its variance (F(1,14) = 6.72, p < .05, R2adj. = .31). No effect of the
script on the residual was found (t(14) = -1.61, n.s., one-tailed). Hence, the effect of the script on the formal quality of
the learners' own single arguments was mediated by the depth of the learners' cognitive elaboration. As indicated by
the correlation reported above, in the second regression analysis the quality of the single arguments of the learning
partners was not a significant predictor of the depth of the learners' cognitive elaboration (F(1,14) = 2.81, n.s., R2adj.
= .12). The scripted construction of single arguments still had a significant and strong effect on the residual from this
regression model (t(14) = -2.17, p < .05, d = 1.16, one-tailed). The effect size of the effect of the scripted construction
of single arguments on the residuals of the depth of the learners' cognitive elaboration was 11.50% percent higher
than the  effect size of the  effect  of the   scripted construction    of  single  arguments     on the depth  of  the learners'
cognitive elaboration (d = 1.04; see RQ1). Hence, the formal quality of the single arguments of the learning partners
cannot be considered as a mediator of the effect of the scripted construction of single arguments on the depth of
cognitive elaboration in this context.

RQ3: Effects of the Scripted Construction of Single Arguments on the Acquisition of
Domain-Specific Knowledge and Knowledge on the Construction of Arguments
         Effects on the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge. Though learners in the scripted construction of
arguments condition used theoretical concepts to describe case information in the individual posttest more often (see
Table 1), this difference was not significant (t(14) = -0.76, n.s., one-tailed). This finding replicates the findings of
Weinberger et al. (2005b) and is in line with our expectations.

         Effects on the acquisition of knowledge on the construction of single arguments. With respect to knowledge
on the construction of arguments, learners in the scripted construction of single arguments condition scored about
30% higher than learners without support of the script in the posttest (see Table 1). The scripted construction of
arguments fosters the acquisition of knowledge on the construction of arguments significantly and substantially (t(14)
= -5.29, p < .05, d = 2.63, one-tailed, see Table 1). This finding again replicates the findings of Weinberger et al.
(2005b) and is in accordance with our expectations.

                                                               667                                                      CSCL 2007
Table 1: Individual outcomes of argumentative knowledge construction by experimental condition: means (m) and
standard deviations (SD).

                                                                Control group                    Script for the construction
                                                                                                    of single arguments
Domain-specific knowledge                                                    4.00                                    5.75
acquisition                                   SD                             2.07                                    3.49
Acquisition of knowledge on                                                  3.50                                    5.50
construction of single arguments              SD                             0.76                                    0.76

Conclusions
          With  regard  to  RQ1,   we   could  replicate the  finding  of  Weinberger    et al. (2005b)    that  the  quality of
argumentation   can  be  fostered  during  collaboration  by  means   of  a  computer-supported     collaboration    script. We
found evidence that the scripted construction of arguments affects the depth of cognitive elaboration of the learning
material.

          With respect to RQ2, we found evidence that the depth of a learner's cognitive elaboration of the learning
material is positively related to the quality of his or her argumentation. The mediator analysis showed that the depth
of  cognitive   elaboration  mediated     the effect of   the  scripted   construction   of  arguments     on   the  quality  of
argumentation. With regard to the relation between the cognitive elaboration and the quality of the other learners'
argumentation in the discussion the relation was less close compared to the relation between the depth of a learner's
cognitive elaboration   of  the learning  material  and  the quality of  the  learner's own    argumentation.    Therefore,  this
evidence  is rather  inconclusive.   The  mediator   analysis  indicated   that the effect  of  the  scripted   construction  of
arguments    on depth   of  cognitive   elaboration  might    not  be   mediated   by   the quality  of   the other    learners'
argumentation in the discussion.

          With  respect  to RQ3,    we  were   able  to replicate a  second   finding   of  Weinberger    et al. (2005b):    The
computer-supported    scripted  construction   of  arguments   fostered  the  acquisition   of knowledge     on  argumentation
without affecting the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge.

          The  findings  of  this  study  provide   support   for crucial   assumptions     about argumentative      knowledge
construction: We found empirical evidence for the claim that high quality collaborative argumentation is associated
with deeper cognitive processing (as assumed, e.g., by Baker, 2003) as well as with the acquisition of knowledge of
the individuals participating in a discussion. The simultaneous increase of the quality of argumentation and the depth
of cognitive processing by the use of the collaboration script and the mediator analysis make it plausible that deep
cognitive elaboration precedes high-quality arguments. However, one reason for deep cognitive elaboration may be
the requirement   to  formulate    high-quality   arguments   with   grounds    and qualifications.  Hence,      the writing  of
arguments and the depth of cognitive elaboration might interact reciprocally in a more complex way than we are
able to test here. The findings with respect to the relation between the quality of arguments of the learning partners
and  the  depth of  cognitive    elaboration  were   more    inconclusive.   They   cannot  be  taken  as    evidence  that   the
contributions of the learning partner do not affect the depth of cognitive elaboration. We can only speculate that
high-quality argumentation as well as low-quality argumentation of learning partners can provoke deep cognitive
processing. It might rather depend on the difference between the position of the individual learner and the position
of his or her learning partners. If a claim with grounds and qualification is in line with the learner's position, he or
she might  tend  to  not engaging    in deep   cognitive  elaboration,  while   a claim  that  challenges    the own   position,
regardless whether a bare one or one supported by grounds, may provoke deep cognitive elaboration. Accordingly,
learners  might be   in need    of support during    the reception   of  arguments.   Although    this study    cannot   provide
conclusive   evidence  on  this issue due  to  the  small sample   size,  the experimental     time constraints  etc., it might
stimulate more   systematic     empirical research   on  the  relevance   of  the learning   partner   in computer-supported
collaborative  argumentation.   Such   research can  take  studies  on  the  interaction of  text characteristics    and  learner
characteristics as starting point (McNamara et al., 1996).

                                                              668                                                      CSCL 2007
          However, some limitations of the study and thus the validity of its findings should be noted as well. To
zoom   in on  the  discursive and  cognitive  mechanisms    involved     in learning through   argumentation,    we  chose   to
restrict our setting with  respect to collaboration   time and   degrees  of freedom    in participation in an   experimental
laboratory setting. Some of the results could possibly be attributed to these restrictions. For example, it is an open
question,  what effects  a collaboration  script  might have   on the  acquisition   of domain-specific   knowledge,     when
longer periods of time are considered. Under such conditions, individuals would be less strictly forced to decide how
to allocate  cognitive  resources   under    time pressure. Moreover,       once the   argumentative  knowledge      has been
acquired, more cognitive resources would be available for the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge (see Kollar
et al., 2005). Furthermore, when the learners are able to perform the scripted activities by themselves, the external
support need no longer be present in the interface and should be faded. It is still unclear, when and how fading of
collaboration support should take place (see Pea, 2004). A further limitation concerning the generalizability of the
findings  applies. The   study  focused  on   specific  aspects  of argumentation,      namely   the construction    of  single
arguments.   The   effects  of  scripts  addressing    more    dialectic aspects   (e.g.,  the  sequencing   of     arguments,
counterarguments, and integration were not examined in this paper. Therefore, the conclusions with regard to the
relation of collaborative argumentation and cognitive processing might be limited to a specific (though important)
subfield of argumentation.

          Methodologically, this study contributed to advance the field in showing the potentials of using the think-
aloud  method   in collaborative   settings. The  use  of this method    provided   data   to exemplarily   test a  hypothesis
inherent  in many    approaches  to collaborative   learning:  The  hypothesis    that specific  collaborative   activities are
associated with the cognitive processing of the information by the participating individuals (e.g., King, 1999). Note
that the main results of this study replicate findings of another study without the think-aloud procedure (Weinberger
et al., 2005b). This can be taken as evidence that the method did not substantially interfere in a systematic way with
the collaborative knowledge construction activities under investigation.

References
Andriessen, J. E. B., Baker, M., & Suthers, D. (Eds.). (2003). Arguing to learn. Confronting cognitions in computer-
          supported collaborative learning environments. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, M. (2003). Computer-mediated argumentative interactions for the co-elaboration of scientific notions. In J.
          Andriessen  &   M.  Baker   &  D.   Suthers  (Eds.), Arguing    to learn:  confronting   cognitions    in computer-
          supported collaborative learning environments (Vol. 1, pp. 1-25). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker,   M., &  Lund,  K.  (1997).  Promoting   reflective  interactions in  a CSCL     environment.  Journal    of Computer
          Assisted Learning, 13, 175-193.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychology research:
          conceptual, strategic, and  statistical considerations.   Journal   of Personality   and   Social Psychology,     51,
          1173-1182.
Bransford, J.D., Franks, J. J., Morris, C.D. , & Stein, B.S. (1979). Some general constraints on learning and memory
          research. In L.S. Cermak & F.I.M. Craik (Eds.), Levels of processing in human memory (pp. 331­354).
          Hillsdal e, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Chinn, C. A., O'Donnell, A. M., & Jinks, T. S. (2000). The structure of discourse in collaborative learning. The
          Journal of Experimental Education, 69(1), 77-97.
Craik, F. I. M. (2002). Levels of processing: Past, present ... and future? Memory, 10(5/6), 305-318.
de Grave, W. S., Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (2001). Effects of problem-based discussion on studying a
          subsequent text: A randomized trial among first year medical students. Instructional Science, 29(1), 33-44.
de Vries, E., Lund, K., & Baker, M. (2002). Computer-mediated epistemic dialogue: explanation and argumentation
          as vehicles for understanding scientific notions. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11(1), 63-103.
Hron, A., Hesse, F.-W., Reinhard, P., & Picard, E. (1997). Strukturierte Kooperation beim computerunterstützten
          kollaborativen   Lernen     [Structured   cooperation     in   computer      supported  collaborative      learning].
          Unterrichtswissenschaft, 25(1), 56-69.
Jermann, P., & Dillenbourg, P. (2003). Elaborating new arguments through a CSCL script. In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.),
          Learning to argue (Vol. 1, pp. 205-226). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Collaboration scripts - a conceptual analysis. Educational Psychology
          Review, 18(2), 159-185.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. (2003). Cooperation scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. In B.
          Wasson & R. Baggetun & U. Hoppe & S. Ludvigsen (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference

                                                             669                                                     CSCL 2007
         on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning - CSCL 2003, COMMUNITY EVENTS - Communication
         and Interaction (pp. 59-60). Bergen, Norway: InterMedia.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Slotta, J. D. (2005). Internal and external collaboration scripts in webbased science learning
         at schools.  In   T. Koschmann,     D.  Suthers  &    T. W.   Chan   (Eds.), Computer    Supported   Collaborative
         Learning 2005: The next 10 Years (pp. 331-340). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Koschmann, T. (2003). CSCL, argumentation and deweyan inquiry: argumentation is learning. In J. Andriessen, M.
         Baker & D. Suthers (Eds.), Arguing to learn: confronting cognitions in computer-supported collaborative
         learning environments (Vol. 1, pp. 1-25). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kuhn, D., & Goh, W. W. L. (2005). Arguing on the computer. In T. Koschmann, D. Suthers & T. W. Chan (Eds.),
         Computer    Supported    Collaborative    Learning  2005:   The    Next 10   Years  (pp. 125-134).   Mahwah,    NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kuhn, D., Shaw, V., & Felton, M. (1997). Effects of dyadic interaction on argumentative reasoning. Cognition and
         Instruction, 15, 3, 287-315.
Marttunen,   M.,   &  Laurinen,    L.   (2001).  Learning    of   argumentation   skills  in networked     and  face-to-face
         environments. Instructional Science, 29, 127-153.
Marttunen,   M.,   Laurinen,   L.,  &   Salminen,    T.  (in   press). Computer-based     and   face-to-face    collaborative
         argumentation at secondary schools in England and Finland. Education, Communication & Information.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Butler-Songer, N., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interaction
         of text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
         Instruction, 14, 1-43.
O'Donnell,  A.  M.  (1999).   Structuring dyadic   interaction  through scripted  cooperation.  In A.   M. O'Donnell    & A.
         King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 179-196). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winton.
Palincsar,  A. S., &  Brown,   A.   L.  (1984). Reciprocal   teaching   of  comprehension-fostering    and comprehension-
         monitoring activities. Cognition & Instruction, 1(2), 117-175.
Spiro, R. J., & Jehng, J. C. (1990). Cognitive flexibility and hypertext: Theory and technology for the nonlinear and
         muli-dimensional traversal of complex subject matter. In D. Nix & R. J. Spiro (Eds.), Cognition, education,
         and multimedia: Exploring ideas in high technology (pp. 163-205). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Stein, B.  S., &   Bransford,  J. D.  (1979). Constraints    on   effective elaboration:  Effects of  precision and  subject
         generation. Journal of Verbal learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 769-777.
Toulmin, S. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
van der Puil, C., Andriessen, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2004). Exploring Relational Regulation in Computer-Mediated
         (Collaborative)   Learning   Interaction: A  Developmental     Perspective.  CyberPsychology    &    Behavior, 7(2),
         183-195.
Weinberger,    A.  (2003). Scripts  for computer-supported      collaborative   learning. Effects  of  social and   epistemic
         cooperation  scripts   on  collaborative  knowledge      construction.  Ludwig-Maximilian      University, Munich.
         Available at: http://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/archive/00001120/01/Weinberger_Armin.pdf.
Weinberger, A., & Fischer, F. (2006). A framework to analyze argumentative knowledge construction in computer-
         supported collaborative learning. Computers & Education, 46(1), 71-95.
Weinberger,    A., Reiserer,   M.,  Ertl, B.,   Fischer, F.,   &  Mandl,    H.  (2005a).  Facilitating  computer-supported
         collaborative learning with cooperation scripts. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers
         and Biases in netwerk-based knowledge communication in groups. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Weinberger,    A., Stegmann,    K.,  &  Fischer,   F. (2005b).    Computer-supported      collaborative learning  in  higher
         education: Scripts for argumentative knowledge construction in distributed groups. In T. Koschmann, D.
         Suthers   & T.-W.    Chan   (Eds.),  Proceedings    of  the International  Conference    on   Computer   Supported
         Collaborative Learning - CSCL 2005 (pp. 717-726). Taipei, TW: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 548-
         573.

Acknowledgements
This research has been funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

                                                             670                                                    CSCL 2007
