                                      Wearable Tag Clouds:
                  Visualizations to Facilitate New Collaborations
                                    Daniel Steinbock, Roy Pea & Byron Reeves
            H-STAR Institute, Stanford University, Wallenberg Hall, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford CA 94305
                                Email: {steinbock, roypea, reeves} @stanford.edu

       Abstract: We describe the development and pilot testing by university faculty of Wearable Tag
       Clouds as a CSCL technology. Tag Clouds are `at-a-glance' information visualizations that, in the
       wearable    form  developed   here,    repurpose social  web    technologies to   support   face-to-face
       interactions. Exploration of collaborative prospects is facilitated by visualizing the substantive
       emphases    of   researchers' written   works.   Pilot  test results suggest    wearable    information
       visualizations can positively impact face-to-face interactions in collaborative communities.

Introduction
       It has been said that researchers in the field of computer-supported collaboration spend a lot of time at
conferences  but rarely use the ideas  and    technologies from  their research to  make  this time  more     productive
(Borovoy,  1998). Conferences   are  sites of face-to-face interaction for  people  with common     interests and offer
opportunities to forge new collaborations. Through interaction, participants learn about each other's interests and
expertise, and evaluate potential collaborative  opportunities. To   echo  (Borovoy,  1998): "[The]   groundwork    for
meaningful and enduring collaborations can be laid at such events and...encouraged with appropriate technology."

       This paper presents the design and pilot testing of a wearable information visualization to facilitate face-to-
face interaction, learning about peers, and the formation of collaborative relationships. The Tag Cloud visualization
technique, a common sight on the Web today, is here applied for the first time in a face-to-face community: to create
personal, wearable visualizations of each participant's research interests and other relevant descriptors. A Wearable
Tag Cloud looks like a traditional conference name-badge, though slightly larger to accommodate the wearer's
personal visualization. After a brief introduction to Tag Clouds and the technology we've developed to produce
them, we connect and compare this work to related research, report preliminary observations from the pilot user
trial, then discuss what was learned and how it will inform future design and research iterations.

                     Figure 1. Tag Cloud worn by the first author at a Stanford faculty retreat.

What are Tag Clouds?
       Tag Clouds came into popular use as web-based visualizations of the keywords (so-called "tags") assigned
by users to describe and categorize user-contributed content online (Mathes, 2004). A typical Tag Cloud visualizes
the relative frequency of the most common tags in use and doubles as an index for accessing content categorized by
each tag. To date, academic research on Tag Clouds is almost non-existent, and what does exist focuses narrowly on
their use as keyword visualizations and website navigation aids (Hassan-Montero, 2006).

                                                          671                                                 CSCL 2007
          This paper generalizes the definition of a Tag Cloud to be any list of words visually weighted by their
relative frequencies in a source text. On the Web, the source is usually a database of keywords. In our work, we
wished to visualize representative research texts like curriculum vitae, research statements and publications. To
pursue this research, we have developed a web-based application (Steinbock, 2006), open to the public, to generate
Tag Clouds from any source text (1). The application outputs Clouds in the canonical form (see Figure 1), an
alphabetic list of words whose type sizes are proportional to their relative frequency in the source text (2).

Previous Work
          Well-designed  information  visualizations enhance      cognition   (Card,  1999) just  as  the affordances   of
designed objects can enhance physical, perceptual and learning abilities (Norman, 1993; Gibson, 1966; Pea, 1993).
The  prototypical  wearable  display for personal  information      is the  conventional   nametag.   The   affordances it
provides--that is, the ways of use it makes possible--are perfectly suited to its role in social situations. A nametag
dispenses information where and when it is most useful and relevant: in plain sight, during face-to-face encounters.

          Researchers have developed computationally-augmented nametags in an attempt to better support face-to-
face interaction at conferences (Borovoy, 1998). The devices have also been used in the CSCL community for
participatory simulations (Andrews, 2002). Known as Thinking Tags, these devices store information about the
wearer (interests, beliefs) and then wirelessly communicate to compute a similarity score on a five-point scale when
two people interact face-to-face. The resulting numeric measure is displayed on an array of LEDs.

          As wearable displays that double as nametags, both Tag Clouds and Thinking Tags dispense personal
information  when  it is useful  and  relevant--during   face-to-face    encounters--but    they differ in   a number   of
important ways. With regard to information affordances, Thinking Tags display simple, quantitative information in
dynamic response to pair-wise interactions. This approach primarily serves the goal of evaluating collaborative
potential and attempts   to automate  social matching  (Terveen,       2005). But  in addition   to being   expensive and
technically complex, this high-tech approach is more automating than augmenting (Engelbart, 1963). Collaborative
potential is algorithmically reduced to an evaluation based on a five-point scale, without establishing the substantive
basis for common interest. In contrast, Wearable Tag Clouds are simple physical printouts of computer-generated
visualizations that, in spite of being non-computational, are more information-rich.

Wearable Tag Clouds
          This predecessor technology and the theory of affordances suggested that new visualization techniques
could prove useful in a facilitative role for face-to-face interactions. Recognizing that the formation of collaborative
relationships involves both learning about others to discover areas of shared interest and evaluating collaborative
potential, Wearable Tag Clouds were designed to support both tasks by making substantive information relevant to
both goals   mutually visible: personalized  visualizations of    a researcher's  persona,  including  research  interests,
expertise, frequent collaborators, institutional and geographic affiliations. The content of representative texts are
used as input to our Tag Cloud engine (e.g. curriculum vitae and research statements) to produce a compact visual
synopsis of the researcher's academic life--a `virtual concept badge' for seeing interest patterns at a glance. The
resulting artifacts act as conversational props, relying on visual perception and interactive conversation--rather than
automation--to unpack the field of shared interest and evaluate collaborative opportunity. Two or more people learn
about each other by examining one another's Tag Clouds; they evaluate the collaborative potential by comparing
their Clouds, and conversing with reference to them. The following section describes observations and analysis from
the first pilot of Wearable Tag Clouds, leading into final design considerations for future iterations.

Pilot User Trial
          Wearable Tag   Clouds   were   piloted for  the   first   time at   a faculty  planning   retreat  for the  new
interdisciplinary H-STAR Institute (Human Sciences and Technologies Advanced Research) at Stanford University.
This retreat gathered  together  twenty-five faculty  members       from a  wide  diversity of   disciplines (Linguistics,
Computer Science, Philosophy, Psychology, Mathematics, Education, and others). The participants--most of whom
were not previously acquainted with those outside their own department--gathered at the retreat for the purpose of
introductions and learning about each other's work, culminating in the identification of emergent, multi-faculty,
cross-department   research  themes, and  the initiation  of  collaborative     research white   papers to   serve as  the
foundation for an H-STAR strategic research plan.

          Personal Tag Clouds were created for each faculty participant using curriculum vitae as the primary input,

                                                          672                                                    CSCL 2007
supplemented with research statements, where available. Figure 1 shows the first author's own Tag Cloud from the
event. Participants first arrived for a welcoming dinner reception, and were given their nametags with Tag Clouds
affixed. Explanation of the source texts was given when asked for. Informal observations and testimony at this event
revealed the Tag Clouds often played leading roles in the conversations that ensued. One faculty member reported
that the Clouds were the basis for or most-common referent in every single conversation she participated in; they
were also frequently observed to be the first subject of inquiry following the exchange of names. These observations
suggest both the initial utility of Tag Clouds as "ice-breakers" and their continued usefulness as a resource for
conversation   topics. The   tangible affordances    of a wearable    visualization were  also  evidenced     as  faculty often
pointed to their own Clouds while making self-referential statements and pointed to others' Clouds when making
inquiries. Also, being able to read a person's largest words from a distance appeared to enable "semantic probing" to
assess the desirability of interaction in advance of an actual encounter.

Future Considerations
          Overall, people used the designed affordances far more than expected. Most wore their Cloud nametags
again on   the second    day of the   retreat, though   reference  to them   dropped   nearly to zero.    This   highlights the
visualization's specific utility during the formative stages of collaboration. Several important critiques came out of
the H-STAR user experience. Participants desired editorial control over their own Tag Clouds so as to produce more
accurate self-representations, and wished that most-recent publications be the primary source of text data instead of
curriculum vitae (to exclude out-of-date research interests). Some desired to see animated visualizations of research
interests over   the course  of their  career.   This   last idea  points to  future   work  on  Wearable     Tag   Clouds   as
computational    devices  which  could,  for    example,  dynamically     highlight  the interests     shared in  common    by
interacting individuals.

          Future design-based   research  on    this paper's  topic is important because    of  the    identified potential for
wearable information visualizations to positively impact collaborative research communities.

Endnotes
(1)  Common English words (and, the, they, etc.) are ignored due to their overwhelming frequency and lack of subject relevance.
     In addition, the Porter Stemming algorithm (Porter, 1980) is used to group words that share a common root.
(2) Other ordering, weighting and layout schemes are possible, and future research will explore these possibilities. Note that color
     value is also used to show relative word frequencies, in a way that mimics depth-perception cues.

References
Andrews, G., MacKinnon, K.A., Yoon, S. (2002). Using "Thinking Tags" with Kindergarten Children: A Dental
          Health Simulation. In Proceedings of CSCL 2002. (pp. 597-598). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Inc.
Borovoy, R., Martin, F., Resnick, M., & Silverman, B. (1998). GroupWear: Nametags that Tell about Relationships.
          In CHI '98 Summary. (pp. 329-330). New York: ACM Press.
Borovoy,   R., Martin,   M.,  Vemuri,   S.,    Resnick, M.,   Silverman,  B., &  Hancock,     C. (1998).      Meme  Tags    and
          Community Mirrors: Moving from Conferences to Collaboration. In Proceedings of Computer Supported
          Cooperative Work 1996. (pp. 159-168). New York, NY: ACM Press.
Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., & Shneiderman, B. (1999). Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
          Think. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Engelbart, D. (1963). A Conceptual Framework for the Augmentation of Man's Intellect. In Vistas in Information
          Handling, Howerton and Weeks (Eds.), Washington, DC: Spartan Books, 1963, pp. 1-29.
Gibson, J.J. (1966). The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Press.
Hassan-Montero,      Y.,  &  Herrero-Solana,     V.   (2006).   in  Proceedings     of  the  International    Conference    on
          Multidisciplinary Information Sciences & Technologies, InSciT2006.
Mathes,   A.   (2004).   Folksonomies:  Cooperative     classification  and   communication     through    shared   metadata.
          Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign.
Norman, D. (1993). Things That Make Us Smart. New York: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon (Ed.). Distributed
          cognitions (pp. 47-87). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Porter, M.F. (1980). An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program, 14(3), 130-137.
Steinbock, D. (2006). http://tagcrowd.com
Terveen, L. & McDonal, D.W. (2005). Social Matching: A Framework and Research Agenda. ACM Transactions on
          Computer-Human Interaction, 12, 401-434.

                                                              673                                                    CSCL 2007
