               Massively Multiplayer Online Games & Education:
                                    An Outline of Research1

                          Constance Steinkuehler, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
                      225 North Mills Street, Madison WI 53706, constances@gmail.com

       Abstract: For those with a vested interest in online technologies for learning, the knowledge and
       skills that constitute successful participation in    massively multiplayer   online games    (MMOs)
       places them squarely among the most promising new digital technologies to date. In this paper, I
       broadly outline the qualitative results of a two and a half year cognitive ethnography of the MMO
       Lineage  and  describe  the current trajectory of research  we   are now pursuing,    based   on those
       findings: (a) the empirical investigation of focused research questions in order to document and
       analyze those core practices that constitute gameplay in virtual worlds, and (b) the development of
       educational activities for after school clubs that capitalize on those capacities found throughout
       our research. This essay concludes with a reflection on the multiple relationships between games
       and education, highlighting the potential for such technologies to transform not only the means of
       education but also perhaps the goals.

Videogames?
       When people think of "videogames," what often comes to mind is arcade games like PacMan or puzzle
games such as Bejeweled or first person shooters rife with guns and explosions and twitch-speed antics in titles such
as Doom. In truth, however, there is a very wide range of successful games on the contemporary market that reveals
the immense variability in what and how gamers actually play: sports games such as Madden NFL where you can
play through the entire season of your favorite football team, adventure games like Myst that let you journey into
beautiful and mysterious worlds unravel the game's core story, turn-based strategy games such as the Civilization
series where you can "replay history" (Squire, 2004) from 4000 BC to the present using accurate real world maps,
online games such as World of Warcraft that allow you to create a digital version of your corporeal self and inhabit
new worlds and new communities, and even music videogames like Guitar Hero where you become the rock star
using a guitar controller instead of a joystick­ all to name a few. Such games constitute a broad array of genres, the
variety and complexity of which is often quite surprising to those who do not play. The research outlined herein
focuses on one genre of game in particular, massively multiplayer online games (MMOs). The remainder of this
article is dedicated to convincing other researchers interested in educational technology as to why.

Massively Multiplayer Online Games
       Massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) are highly graphical 2 or 3-D videogames played online (see
Figure 1) allowing individuals, through their self-created digital characters or "avatars," to interact not only with the
gaming software (the designed environment of the game and the computer-controlled characters within it) but with
other players' avatars as well. These virtual worlds are persistent social and material worlds loosely structured by
open-ended (fantasy) narratives, where players are largely free to do as they please ­ slay ogres, siege castles, barter
goods in town, or shake the fruit out of trees. They are notorious for their peculiar combination of designed "escapist
fantasy" yet emergent "social realism" (Kolbert, 2001): in a setting of wizards and elves, ogres and dragons, people
save for homes, create basket indices of the trading market, build relationships of status and solidarity, and worry
about crime. For those who have never logged into an MMO, it is hard to believe such virtual worlds are available
for the monthly price of a fast food dinner and not some mere fantasy found only in sci-fi novels or television.

       Yet, these virtual worlds are significant. If we look at the current global player populations of just those
three game titles included in the research described here ­ Lineage I with 1.5 million players, Lineage II with 1.4
million, and World of Warcraft with 8.0 million (and still growing) ­ we find a population base of roughly 10.9
million global. Such numbers rival every U.S. metropolis, including even New York. When this line of research into
such online play environments was initiated five years ago, virtual worlds were still considered a somewhat "fringe
topic" in academics; today, their empirical investigation, while still considered somewhat novel in Education, has
generated some of the most cutting edge research in many well-established fields including economics (Castronova,
2001, 2002), law (Balkin & Noveck, 2006; Hunter, 2003; Hunter, & Lastowka, 2005), sociology (Cherny, 1999;

                                                         674                                                 CSCL 2007
Ducheneaut, Moore, & Nickell, 2004; Taylor & Jakobsson, 2003), anthropology (Taylor, 2006b), and psychology
(Turkle, 1994, 1995; Yee, 2005) (for a full review, see Steinkuehler, in press-a).

         The virtual economies of MMO are surprisingly quite significant as well. Each virtual world has its own in-
game currency, in-game goods, in-game trading, and therefore in-game economy. Despite the standard terms of the
End User License Agreements (EULAs) of the companies who create and own such titles, many people now buy
and sell virtual currency and items outside the game on online trading sites such as eBay. People pay real dollars for
virtual money and goods. In 2001, the economist Castronova set out to measure the financial import of such virtual
worlds based on such transactions only to find that the economies of some virtual kingdoms rival the economies
many  important   "real world"  countries.  Take  Norrath,  for    example,   the virtual   world of    the MMO    entitled
EverQuest. By Castronova's 2001 calculations, Norrath was the 77th largest economy in the real world with a GNP
per capita somewhere between Russia and Bulgaria. One platinum piece, a piece of currency in the virtual kingdom
of Norrath, was trading on real world trading markets higher than both the Yen and the Lira. Thus, if the general
popularity of virtual worlds fails to impress, perhaps their sheer economic value in terms of the good old American
dollar surely might.

      Figure 1. Screenshot from the MMO World of Warcraft showing the in-game virtual world and interface.

MMOs & Learning: An Outline of Research
         MMOs,    however,  are important   not  just in terms   of popularity    or economics;   they   are educationally
important as well. For those of us with a vested interest in online technologies for learning, the kind of individual
and collaborative knowledge    and  skills that constitute successful   participation   in  MMOs     is what   places  them
squarely among the most promising new digital technologies to date. In this paper, I outline in very broad strokes the
qualitative results of a two and a half year cognitive ethnography of the MMO Lineage (both I & II) completed in
2005 and then describe the current research program we are now pursuing based on those findings. With a generous
grant from  the MacArthur   Foundation,    our research  team   is investigating  focused   research questions,  based   on
previous research and   contemporary  definitions  of   digital media   literacy, toward    the end  goal   of not only  to
empirically document    and analyze those  core  practices that    constitute gameplay   in virtual  worlds  but also,  and
ultimately, to build educational activities for after school clubs that capitalizes on those capacities found throughout
our research (see Figure  2). This  essay  concludes  with a    general reflection   on the multiple    relationships worth

                                                          675                                                     CSCL 2007
consideration between games and education, highlighting the potential for such technologies to transform not only
the means of education but also perhaps even a few of the goals as well.

                            Figure 2. An overall outline of the three phases of this research.

Laying the Foundation: Cognitive Ethnography
         In 2001,   when  this   research was  first conceptualized,   there was    a paucity of research  on  MMOs    and
learning. While previous small studies had focused on specific practices related to cognition and learning such as
playstyle  (Bartle,  1996), gender   (Bruckman,      1993;   Danet,    1998;  Herring,    1996), race   (Nakamua,   1995),
communication    (Carlstrom,   1992; Clodius,     1996a; Masterson,    1996)  ritual  (Clodius,  1995,  1996b) &   identity
(Clodius, 1997; Dibbell, 1998; Ito, 1997; Raybourn, 1998; Suler, 1996; Turkle, 1994, 1995), little could be found in
terms specific to education and most consisted of only web-published essays and theses. Yet the question remained:
If individuals were  engaged   in such    worlds, oftentimes    for extended periods   to the detriment of  other forms of
leisure pursuits (such  as  television),  what were   they   learning  from  it, if  anything?   While there  were several
ethnographic attempts to document the social customs and mores of such environments, little could be found that
might answer the simple question: What, if anything, was the intellectual merit of playing in virtual worlds?
         Cognitive   ethnography   (Hutchins,  1995)   ­    the description  of  specific cultures in  terms  of  cognitive
practices, their basis, and their consequences ­ was chosen as the primary research methodology during the first
phase of this research as a way to build a basic foundation toward answering this seemingly simple question. This
"thick  description" (Geertz,  1973) included     roughly   28  months  of participant  observation in  the  game, several
thousand lines of recorded and transcribed observations of naturally occurring gameplay, collections of game-related
player  communications    (e.g., discussion board    posts, chatroom   and   instant  message  conversations,  emails) and
community documents (e.g., fan websites, community-authored game fictions, company- and community-written
player manuals and guidebooks), and interviews with multiple informants. The main focus throughout this initial
phase of the research (Steinkuehler, 2005) was to document and analyze the forms of cognition and learning that
make up successful MMO gameplay. At the risk of gross simplification, the broad results were that participation in
such worlds crucially entails:

         ·  Complex   forms of socially   and materially distributed    cognition   including the coordination of
            people, (virtual) tools, artifacts, and text, across multiple multimedia, multimodal "attentional
            spaces" (Lemke, n.d.) (Steinkuehler, 2006c),
         ·  Collaborative   problem  solving   practices    in  cross-functional  teams   within  the  game   and
            distributed fandom    communities      beyond   them,    both  of    which  emulate   key   forms  of
            collaboration espoused in "new capitalist" workplaces (Steinkuehler, 2006a, 2006b, 2006e),

                                                             676                                                  CSCL 2007
        ·   Novel literacy practices including the use of highly specialized forms of language for in-game
            social interaction and genres of story-telling, fan fiction writing, and discursive argumentation
            on game-related forums (Squire & Steinkuehler, 2005; Steinkuehler, in press-b),
        ·   Scientific habits of mind (American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1993) such as
            hypothesis testing and  revision,  and  model-based    reasoning  (Steinkuehler   &  Chmiel,    2006;
            Steinkuehler & Duncan, 2007),
        ·   Forms of computational literacy (the understanding and use of computational models, such as
            algorithms or code, to conceptualize a problem, diSessa 2000) represented by player-generated
            artifacts such as user interface modifications or "mods" (Steinkuehler, 2006d), and
        ·   Mechanisms   for learning  crucial to success  in  those  above such  as reciprocal  apprenticeship
            (Steinkuehler, 2004), through which individuals enculturate one other into routine and valued
            practices and perspectives, and a culture of collective intelligence (Levy, 1999; Jenkins, 2006)
            evidenced in the joint creation, maintenance, and transformation of shared online repositories of
            community knowledge and skills (Steinkuehler, 2006a).

This list represents most of the core social/intellectual practices that characterize MMO gameplay, although not all
(for a full review, see  Steinkuehler, 2005);  even   this partial inventory,  however,   is  non-trivial, including  some
knowledge and skills that rival those found in many of today's typical classrooms. As to the question, "is there
educational potential for virtual worlds such as those found in standard MMO gameplay," the answer appeared to be
a resounding yes.

Focused Empirical Investigations in Two Virtual World Contexts
        The second phase of this research program, now currently underway, is comprised of focused and specific
research questions pursued using a mix of both qualitative and quantitative methods in two contexts: (a) the MMO
World  of Warcraft,  now   the single  best-selling computer   game    on the  market    with over eight   million players
worldwide, and (b) Second Life, a popular virtual but non-game online environment. In effect, we are comparing a
"gaming" context for play to a "virtual frontier" context more ostensibly focused on recognizable and consequential
entrepreneurship based on the premise that, in order for us to successfully design informal learning activities based
on virtual worlds, we need to understand which patterns of practice are game-specific and which can be generalized
to virtual world communities more broadly. Our goal is to go beyond mere plausibility argument for the potential of
virtual worlds for learning to look more systemically at what knowledge and skills they foster and in what ways.
Based  on   ethnographic findings  (outlined   above)  and  a  contemporary   definition  of  digital media   literacy that
crucially includes not just critical consumption of media but also and as importantly production (Gee, 2003), our
research group is targeting five main areas for research selected as those most fruitful for further exploration: (1)
collaborative problem-solving,    (2)  digital   media   literacy  practices, (3)   informal   scientific  reasoning,   (4)
computational  literacy, and  (5) cultural mechanisms    for  learning (see Figure   2). Given  space  constraints,  I will
describe three of these five strands of research in order to illustrate the shape and texture of such activities and
demonstrate   why they   are particularly  worth further study:   (1) collaborative  problem-solving,   (2)  digital media
literacy practices, and (4) computational literacy.

Collaborative Problem-Solving
        In MMOs, individuals engage in collaborative problem solving as a key component of regular gameplay.
Here, groups of five or more players join together to tackle problems more challenging than one person alone could
typically solve. For example, in World of Warcraft, players regularly enter "instances" or "raids" together to battle
monsters of various sorts while making their way through, say, a dungeon or a jungle outpost (see Figure 3). Such
gameplay is called "instancing" or "raiding" since, as the game is designed, the software renders the chosen area of
the world as a single instance that only those members of the group can access, thereby allowing them to proceed
through the game content without interruption from other players within the game space. What is curious about such
activities is not the software's rendering of the content per se but rather the way in which such groups function in
order to succeed. Specifically, in such endeavors, a core group takes the given task or project through completion
from planning through to follow-up, functioning only on a semi-permanent basis by dissolving once the goal is
completed. The group is comprised of individuals from different functional areas (for example, a healer versus a
damage-dealer) yet redundancy or overlap is built into such configurations so that, should any one person need
assistance, another group member is able to take up the proverbial slack. Instancing groups (or raid parties) are self-
managed, with a group goal (e.g., completion of the given dungeon area) yet individual accountability (e.g., the
healer must successfully heal or risk policing of their behaviors if not outright removal from the group).

                                                           677                                                   CSCL 2007
Figure 3. Screenshot from the MMO World of Warcraft showing an in-game collaborative problem-solving "raid".

          Such structural features are important, as they not only describe collaborative problem solving within the
game but also, as luck might have it, collaborative problem-solving within many contemporary workplace settings.
They are, in fact, cross-functional teams (Fredericks, & De Lia, 2005; Lindborg, 1997; Michalski, 2005; Parker,
2002) ­   a key feature of  many of  today's "new   capitalist" corporate  workplaces such  as  those found  in  global
financing or technology. In effect, the structures of collaboration found in online games parallels the structure of
collaboration that increasingly marks high-end workplaces. While it seems counter-intuitive that running instances
with joint  problem-solving  groups  in the context of  a  game   might train an individual for teamwork     in today's
workplace, the similarities between the two forms of collaboration are quite striking and therefore warrant further
research.

Literacy practices
          MMO gaming is participation in a constellation of literacy practices (Steinkuehler, in press-a, in press-b),
one with fuzzy boundaries that expand with continued play: What is at first confined to the game alone soon spills
over into the virtual world beyond it (e.g., websites, chatrooms, email) and even life off-screen (e.g., telephone calls,
face-to-face meetings). The online fandom that surrounds successful game titles is a rich yet nebulous sphere of
multimodal multimedia including websites, blogs, threaded discussion boards, fan fictions, fan art, annotated game
screenshots, cartoons, chatrooms, instant messaging, in-character emails, and even voice over IP (VoIP). In order to
succeed in the game over time, participants must increasingly engage with the online fandom beyond the virtual
world itself in order,  for example, to  research strategies  for success  against various in-game   challenges,  or to
develop deeper understandings of the class of character they play not only by using their own in-game experiences
to better understand fandom texts (such as those listed above) about their given class but also by using such texts to
better understand their own experiences.

          Like all interpretive communities, MMO gamers take up the symbolic, cultural materials offered them by
media to collectively create the form and substance of their own cultural worlds (Squire & Steinkuehler, in press;
Taylor, 2002, in press). As such, they are no different from the folk cultures of old (Jenkins, 1998), except that, now,
the consumers   have increasingly user-friendly   tools at their  disposal to work  with,  including  online access  to

                                                          678                                                CSCL 2007
sociotechnical networks that enable their easy distribution, such as fan groups and guilds. Consider, for example, the
fan fiction excerpt shown below that circulated through much of Lineage fandom in 2003.

                                 Figure 4. Excerpt from a Lineage fan fiction story.

In it, the author writes about a pseudo-fictional adventure ­ partially based on an actual occurrence, partially based
on the genre conventions of medieval fantasy stories. The story is written at a grade level appropriate to the author's
age; however, what is most interesting here is the purpose for which he purportedly wrote it. The story is dedicated
to the second  main  characters  appearing   in   its pages ­   a girl  gamer  roughly the author's age.  In one   email
distribution of the story, the author writes, "I included a new story if you would like to read or post up, its awesome
^^ [raised eyebrows] even though I just used it to hit on this girl..."

         It is difficult to imagine another cultural space in contemporary American youth culture at least in which
writing a short story might be viewed as a recognizable way to court girls. In the context of MMOs, however, such
writing is a central and highly valued practice. Here, adeptness with the pen, so to speak, carries a certain social
status such  that those who  show    exceptional  skill in  the creation  of content oftentimes develop   a rather large
following. Moreover, in these contexts, such writing is typically not considered ancillary to normative gaming but
rather a central part of what it means to participate. The following in-game social exchange illustrates:

         SharpPaw          oh yea! to celebrate me coming back to pledge &
         SharpPaw          being rank ive decided to write another story!
         SharpPaw          for site!
         Adeleide          omg do it! We need more stories!

         SharpPaw          ^^ o'course
         SharpPaw          in fact ive planned it
         SharpPaw          I got the PERFECT story idea the other day when
         ...               ...
         SharpPaw          its called An Old Knight's Tale
         SharpPaw          youll see it within the next 2-3 months

         Adeleide          wow! Do u like to write in ur spare time?
         SharpPaw          well na I like to play this in my spare time

In this exchange, a beginning high school student who is on summer break discusses the short story he has recently
decided to author in commemoration of rejoining the guild and being promoted in rank (after being grounded from
gaming for a while until he raised his grade to his mother's satisfaction). When asked whether he likes to write in his
spare time, he responds, somewhat baffled, "well na i like to play this in my spare time." In the context of MMOs at
least, adolescents appear perfectly willing to engage in long, thoughtful writing projects ­ "2-3 months" planning,
not including  the initial work  done  prior to   this  exchange  ­ in   their own spare time,  not as isolated literary
"assignment" but as part and parcel of what it means to game online. Our current undertaking, then, is to better
articulate the forms of literacy practice fostered in MMOs, who engages in them, to what extent, and why.

                                                            679                                                 CSCL 2007
          One explanation for this willingness to engage in such intellectual labor has to do with the way in which
virtual worlds function as a new "third place" (Steinkuehler & Williams, 2006; cf. Oldenburg, 1999). By providing
spaces for  social interaction   and  relationships  beyond   the workplace     and home,  MMOGs      have the   capacity   to
function as one novel form of a new "third place" for informal sociability much like the pubs, coffee shops, and
other hangouts of old. Moreover, participation in such virtual "third places" appears particularly well suited to the
formation of bridging social capital ­ social relationships that, while not usually providing deep emotional support,
do typically  function    to expose   the individual  to  a diversity  of  worldviews   (Steinkuehler,   2006d).  Given    the
unfortunate  rise of  fundamentalism    in  the face  of globalization  (Giddens,   2006), such exposure   to diversity  is a
valuable thing indeed.

Computational literacy
          As  a final  example   of   the specific areas   of investigation  currently  underway,   consider    the creation,
adaptation,  and  use  of game   "mods"    (short for modifications),   which   are derivatives of  a given,  professionally
released game title into something new. In World of Warcaft, for example, modding practices take the form of so-
called user  interface (UI)   "add   ons" created  by and   for   the community    of players  themselves. UI    add-ons   are
essentially patches to the game software that change the user interface in some way ­improving the structure and
function of the interface by increasing the number of action buttons available, or diagnostic tools that increase the
game's  functionality  by    allowing the  user to  access  information   on their  own  performance   in game   and/or    the
performance of others. UI Mods play a vital role in the gaming community, providing the tools and functions crucial
to in-game success. Some UI add-on's have developed such a following that not only do some guilds no longer
allow their members to run instances without them (Taylor, 2006a) but also, in some cases, they are incorporated by
the company who owns the title (Blizzard) directly into the original gaming software itself.

          Such creations are computational literacy artifacts (diSessa, 2000): made objects that evidence not merely
computer literacy (such as the ability to burn digital files to a CD) but rather the ability to understand and use
computational models, such as code or a mathematical equation of some form, to conceptualize and solve a given
problem. In interviews with those community members who create such software, an interesting pattern emerges:
Users  of mods    become   critics/analysts of  mods  become    creators  of mods.  For  some,  modding    replaces  gaming
entirely, with "building software" becoming the ultimate "end game" (Steinkuehler, 2006f). To be sure, the modding
community    of World   of   Warcraft  represents  only  a  small minority   of actual players  (which   raises the research
question of what gateways and barriers to such practices exist); however few such add-on creators may be, however,
their products function as hubs in the socio-technical network, calibrating the gameplay of others' in tangible ways.
For example, at last check, the number of downloads for "Titan Panel" mod was over six million, for "Recap" mod
over 285,000.    Compared     to the  average   number   of readers    of an academic   journal  article (five), such  large
followings give pause for thought.

Designing MMO-Based Activities for After School Programs
          Our current  phase     of research (outlined   above)   aims  to  better  understand  the form  and    structure  of
naturally-occurring, informal communities in virtual environments across two contrasting contexts; however, such
an understanding is not the end goal in and of itself. Instead, it is our belief that such basic research can then be
leveraged toward the development of intentional learning environments, specifically those designed around virtual
worlds. Innovative NSF projects such as Harvard University's River City (e.g., Dede, Ketelhut, & Ruess, 2003) and
Indiana University-Bloomington's Quest Atlantis (e.g., Barab, Arcici, & Jackson, 2005) have begun to tackle the
complexities of designing virtual worlds in the service of learning, yet to date such work has been done largely
outside the purview of emerging research on such technologies out "in the wild" (Hutchins, 1995). In contrast, our
goal is to build prototype after-school activities based on a more robust understanding of what educationally valued
practices arise out in virtual worlds in natural contexts. In so doing, we hope to build a better bridge between kid's
media literacy practices outside of school and those promoted within them. By putting pressure on schools to reform
through the promotion and viral spread of innovative after-school programs while, at the same time, opening up
access to such   worlds   of practice to  students who   might    not have such  access otherwise,  this  research  hopes   to
address the current digital disconnect (Levin & Arafeh, (2002) between the use of online technologies in and out of
classrooms.

          Toward these ends, the final phase of this project focuses on the development of educational activities, to
be implemented in the after-school incubators established here at University of Wisconsin-Madison, that take what
we have learned about digital media literacy communities in the context of virtual worlds and, building on those

                                                              680                                                   CSCL 2007
findings, recreate similar communities of practice in informal contexts for learning. Because the structure of these
activities is contingent on findings from the second phase of research currently underway, their form and structure
will, in effect, provide a context for conducting design experiments that test theories about what mechanisms (both
technical  and  social) foster  which  intellectual practices   and  how   (i.e., for testing  the claims generated   through
empirical   analysis throughout    the current   phase  of   research). By  demonstrating      the potential   of  such online
worlds/cultures, first out "in the wild" and then in informal after-school contexts, we hope to maybe one day change
the very culture of schooling into something more relevant, promising, and transformative for all.

Conclusions
          While the research outlined herein ultimately focuses on games in classrooms ­ specifically, using off-the-
shelf virtual worlds such as World of Warcraft or Second Life in after school contexts ­ in truth there are multiple
relationships between games and (in)formal classrooms worth consideration. Oftentimes, when the issue of "games
and learning" is raised, there is a tendency to focus solely on the relationship between games and classrooms to the
exclusion of all others ­ a fixation whose symptoms include a near obsessive focus on the question of what game-
related knowledge and skills "transfer" to formal classrooms, despite the grand irony that it was always classrooms
that  were  supposed   to  teach things   that might transfer   to life beyond    them,   not  the other way   around.   Other
relationships between games and classrooms can and do exist, however; for example, the relationship of games as
classrooms. By thinking of games as learning environments in and of themselves, we can discern design principles
in games that might be fruitfully applied to the design of other learning environments, be they classrooms, after
school clubs, or corporate training retreats. In fact, it is this fundamental relationship that underlies much of the
seminal   work  of   James  Paul   Gee  (2003).  And    too, of   course,  there  is  the notion   of games    for classrooms,
exemplified in the development of River City, of Quest Atlantis, and the entire Serious Games movement to date.
One relationship that often gets lost, however, is the simple fact of games despite classrooms. With more than eight
out  of every  ten kids in  America    having  a videogame    console   in the    home,   and over half  having   two or more
(Rideout, Roberts, & Foehr, 2005), it becomes increasingly clear that games are the new literacy, whether those of
us  in  education  are willing  to recognize   them  as such  or   not. From   this   perspective, we  need    to research and
understand games for the sheer reason that they are, much to the chagrin of an older generation, one of the most
important new cultural media to date.

          In my own research, however, I have come to think of games as a new gateway drug. Based on our ongoing
research, I find the most apt rhetorical framing of the question to be: How can games provide entrée into other
intellectual practices outside the game that we, as a community, value? How and when and for whom might virtual
games be a bridge to worlds beyond them? We know that games are a push technology, moving into the home and
dragging computers, for example, in their wake (Williams, 2004), but we would be mistaken to think this merely a
hardware or software issue. They bring with them important social and intellectual practices and dispositions as
well.  In these ways,   MMO      communities    are push   communities,    functioning    as  our  proverbial  canaries in the
coalmine   when   in comes   to  the life in the globalized   online world.   And,    from  this  perspective, their empirical
investigation now can only better prepare us for the radical changes to come, whether schools respond in efficacious
ways or ultimately render themselves increasingly obsolete.

Endnotes
(1) This paper has been adapted for publication in Educational Technology magazine.

References
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1993). Benchmarks for science literacy. New York: Oxford
          University Press.
Balkin, J. M. & Noveck, B. (Eds.). (2006) The state of play: Law, games, and virtual worlds. New York: New York
          University Press.
Barab,  S., Arcici,    A., &  Jackson,    C. (2005). Eat   your    vegetables  and    do  your   homework:    A    design-based
          investigation of enjoyment and meaning in learning. Educational Technology, 45(1), 15-21.
Bartle, R. (1996). Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit MUDs. Journal of MUD Research, 1(1).
Bruckman, A. S. (1993). Gender swapping on the Internet. Paper presented at The Internet Society, San Fransisco
          CA, August.

                                                              681                                                     CSCL 2007
Carlstrom,  E.-L. (1992). Better  living through  language:   The   communicative   implications  of a text-only   virtual
         environment.       Unpublished         Manuscript.          Retrieved      July       1,      2005         from
         ftp://ftp.game.org/pub/mud/text/research/communicative.txt
Castronova, E. (2001). Virtual worlds: A first-hand account of market and society on the cyberian frontier. CESifo
         Working Paper Series No. 618.
Castronova, E. (2002). On virtual economies. CESifo Working Paper Series No. 752.
Cherny, L. (1999). Conversation and community: Discourse in a social MUD. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Clodius, J. (1995).  Ritual and   religion on  DragonMud.   Unpublished    Manuscript.   Retrieved   July 1, 2005   from
         http://dragonmud.org/people/jen/ritual.html
Clodius, J. (1996a).  Orality  in a text-based  community.  Unpublished    Manuscript.   Retrieved   July 1, 2005   from
         http://dragonmud.org/people/jen/oral.html
Clodius, J. (1996b) Shar's return: Performance as gifting. Unpublished manuscript. Retrieved July 1, 2005 from
         http://dragonmud.org/people/jen/shar.html
Clodius, J. (1997). Creating a community of interest: "Self" and "other" on DragonMud. Paper presented at the
         Combined Conference on MUDs, Jackson Hole WY, January 15.
Danet, B. (1998). Text as mask: Gender, play and performance on the Internet. In S. G. Jones (Ed.), Cybersociety
         2.0: Computer-mediated communication and community revisited, (pp. 129-158). Thousand Oaks CA: Sage
         Publications.
Dede, C., Ketelhut, D. & Ruess, K. (2003). Motivation, usability, and learning outcomes in a prototype museum-
         based multiuser virtual environment. In P. Bell, R. Stevens, & T. Satwicz, (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fifth
         ICLS. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dibbell, J. (1998). My tiny life: Crime and passion in a virtual world. New York: Henry Holt.
diSessa, A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge MA: The MIT Press.
Ducheneaut, N., Moore, R. J., & Nickell, E. (2004). Designing for sociability in massively multiplayer games: an
         examination of the "third places" of SWG. In J. H. Smith & M. Sicart (Eds.), Proceedings of the Other
         Players Conference. Copenhagen: IT University of Copenhagen.
Fredericks, E.  & De   Lia, E.  (2005).  From  cross   purposes  to   cooperation: The ten  factors  that unify  a cross-
         functional team. iUniverse, Inc.
Gee, J. P. (2003). What videogames have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Giddens, A. (2000) Runaway world: How globalization is reshaping our lives. New York: Routledge.
Herring,  S.  (1996).  Gender     and   democracy    in  computer-mediated     communication.     In  R.   Kling   (Ed.),
         Computerization    and   controversy: Value   conflicts and   social choices  (pp. 476-501).  San   Diego  CA:
         Academic Press.
Hunter, D. (2003). Cyberspace as place, and the tragedy of the digital anticommons. California Law Review 91(2).
         439-520.
Hunter, D. & Lastowka, G. (2005). Amateur-to-amateur. Enforcement of copyright laws on information technology.
         William & Mary Law Review 46(3) 951.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Ito, M. (1997). Virtually embodied:   The   reality of  fantasy  in a multi-user dungeon.   In D. Porter  (Ed.), Internet
         Culture, (pp. 87-110). New York: Routledge.
Jenkins, H., III. (1998) The poachers and the stormtroopers: Popular culture in the digital age. Paper presented at
         the University of Michigan.
Jenkins, H., III. (2006) Convergence culture. New York: New York University Press.
Kolbert, E. (2001, May 28). Pimps and dragons. The New Yorker, 77(13), 88.
Lemke, J. (n.d.). Why study games? Notes toward a basic research agenda for education. Unpublished manuscript.
Levin, D. & Arafeh, S. (2002). The digital disconnect. Washington DC: Pew Internet & American Life Project.
Levy, P. (1999). Collective intelligence (R. Bononno, Trans.). Cambridge MA: Perseus Books.
Lindborg, H. J. (1997) The basics of cross-functional teams. Quality Resources.
Masterson, J. T., III. (1996). Nonverbal communication in text based virtual realities. Unpublished master's thesis,
         University of Montana. Retrieved July 1, 2005 from http://www.johnmasterson.com/thesis/toc.html
Michalski. (2005). Forty tools for cross functional teams. Productivity, Inc.
Nakamura, L. (1995). Race in/for cyberspace. Works and Days, 25/26, 13(1&2).
Oldenburg, R. (1999). The great good place. New York: Marlowe & Company.
Parker, G. M. (2003) Cross- functional teams: Working with allies, enemies, and other strangers. San Francisco:
         Jossey Bass.

                                                          682                                                   CSCL 2007
Raybourn, E. M. (1998). The quest for power, popularity, and privilege in cyberspace: Identity construction in a
        text-based    multi-user virtual reality.  Proceedings    of the Western    Speech  Communication        Association
        Conference, Denver, February.
Rideout, V., Roberts, D. F., & Foehr, U. G. (2005). Generation M: Media in the lives of 8-18 year-olds (Publication
        No. 7250). Washington DC: The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
Squire, K.   D. (2004).  Replaying   history: Learning    world  history through   playing  Civilization   III. Unpublished
        Dissertation. Bloomington IN: Indiana University­Bloomington.
Squire, K. D. & Steinkuehler, C. A. (2005). Meet the gamers. Library Journal, 130(7), 38-41.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2004). Learning in massively multiplayer online games. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A. Sandoval, N.
        Enyedy,     A. S. Nixon,   &  F. Herrera   (Eds.),  Proceedings   of the Sixth  International  Conference      of the
        Learning Sciences (pp. 521-528). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Steinkuehler,   C. (2005).   Cognition and    learning in  massively  multiplayer   online  games:   A  critical   approach.
        University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI.
Steinkuehler, C. (2006a). Games as a highly visible medium for the study of distributed, situated cognition. In S.A.
        Barab, K.E. Hay, N.B. Songer, & D.T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference of the
        Learning Sciences (pp. 1048-1049). Mahwah NJ: Erlbuam.
Steinkuehler, C. (2006b). The mangle of play. Games & Culture, 1(3), 1-14.
Steinkuehler,   C. A.  (2006c).  Massively   multiplayer  online  videogaming    as participation  in a  Discourse.    Mind,
        Culture, & Activity, 13(1), 38-52.
Steinkuehler,   C. (2006d).  Virtual worlds,  learning,   &  the new  pop cosmopolitanism.    Teachers     College   Record,
        12843.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (2006e). Why game (culture) studies now? Games and Culture, 1(1), 97-102.
Steinkuehler,   C. (2006f).  World of  YourCraft:  Learning   &   collaboration  in massively multiplayer   online   games.
        Presented at Serious Games Summit, Washington DC, October 30-31.
Steinkuehler, C. & Duncan, S. (2007). Scientific habits of mind in virtual worlds. Presented at the Annual Meeting
        of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), San Francisco, February 15-19.
Steinkuehler, C. A. (in press-a). Cognition and literacy in massively multiplayer online games. In D. Leu, J. Coiro,
        C. Lankshear, & K. Knobel (Eds.), Handbook of Research on New Literacies. Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Steinkuehler, C. (in press-b). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. To appear
        in   B. E.  Shelton  &  D.  Wiley  (Eds.),  The   educational  design and   use  of simulation   computer    games.
        Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Steinkuehler, C. & Chmiel, M. (2006). Fostering scientific habits of mind in the context of online play. In S.A.
        Barab, K.E. Hay, N.B. Songer, & D.T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference of the
        Learning Sciences (pp 723-729). Mahwah NJ: Erlbuam.
Steinkuehler,   C. &  Williams,  D.  (2006).  Where  everybody    knows   your  (screen) name:    Online   games    as "third
        places." Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(4), article 1.
Suler,    J.     (1996).     The      psychology       of    cyberspace.      Retrieved     July      1,    2005        from
        http://www.rider.edu/~suler/psycyber/psycyber.html
Taylor, T. L. (2002). Whose game is this anyway?: Negotiating corporate ownership in a virtual world. In F. Mäyrä
        (Ed.),  Computer     Games   and   Digital Cultures  Conference   Proceedings,   (227-242).    Tampere:     Tampere
        University Press.
Taylor, T.L. (2006a). Does WoW change everything? How a PvP server, multinational player base, and surveillance
        mod scene caused me pause. Games & Culture, 1(4), 318-337.
Taylor, T. L. (2006b). Play between worlds: Exploring online game culture. Cambridge MA: The MIT Press.
Taylor, T.   L. (in  press). Pushing   the borders:  Player  participation   and game    culture. In  J.   Karaganis   &  N.
        Jeremijenko     (Eds.),  Network_Netplay:    Structures   of  participation  in digital   culture. Durham:     Duke
        University Press.
Taylor, T.   L. &   Jakobsson,  M.   (2003).  The  Sopranos   meets   EverQuest:    Socialization processes     in massively
        multiuser games. FineArt Forum, 17(8).
Turkle, S. (1994). Constructions and reconstructions of self in virtual reality: Playing in the MUDS. Mind, Culture,
        & Activity, 1(3), 158-167.
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Touchstone.
Williams,  D.   (2003).  The  video  game    lightning  rod: Constructions   of  a  new  media    technology,    1970-2000.
        Information, Communication and Society, 6(4), 523-550.
Yee, N. (2006). The Daedalus Project. Retrieved July 1, 2006 from http://www.nickyee.com/daedalus

                                                             683                                                    CSCL 2007
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the GLS [Games, Learning & Society] Group, a cooperative agreement between the
Academic ADL Co-Lab and the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and by a generous grant from the MacArthur
Foundation. Constance Steinkuehler is principal investigator. The ideas expressed herein are not endorsed by and
may not be representative of positions endorsed by the sponsoring agencies.

                                                         684                                               CSCL 2007
