   Analyzing Collaborative Processes and Learning from Hypertext
                          Through Hierarchical Linear Modeling

                 Agni Stylianou-Georgiou, Elena Papanastasiou, Intercollege, Nicosia, Cyprus
                        stylianou.a@intercollege.ac.cy, papanastasiou.e@intercollege.ac.cy
       Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, puntambekar@education.wisc.edu

        Abstract:     The  purpose     of this  study   was   to understand   how     individual   and group
        characteristics interact to produce a rich understanding of domain knowledge. Metanavigation
        support in the form of prompts was provided to groups of students who collaboratively used a
        hypertext    system   called CoMPASS       to complete   a   design  challenge. Multilevel    analysis
        techniques were used to understand how the provision of metanavigation support to groups
        interact with   group    navigation behavior  and   learner's metacognitive    awareness   of  reading
        strategies to  affect individual   learning.  The findings   of this study   revealed that providing
        metanavigation support to the groups contributed positively in enabling students to gain a rich
        understanding of domain knowledge. Our findings also indicate that there was a significant
        negative     interaction of  students'  metacognitive    awareness   and perceived    use  of  reading
        strategies and the presence of metanavigation support while interacting with hypertext.

Purpose of the study
        In   recent  years  different  methodological     approaches    have  been   used  to  measure    and  analyze
collaborative processes    while   learning  in technology-supported      settings. Some   of  the  approaches   were:
interaction and  social network    analyses  (Jordan  &  Henderson,   1995;   Kreijns,  Kirschner  &   Jochems,  2003;
Reffay & Chanier, 2003), various types of discourse analysis (Chinn, O'Donnell & Jinks, 2000), matrix analysis
(Wortham, 1999), and content analysis schemes (De Wever, Schellens, Valcke, & Van Keer, 2005; Strijbos,
Martens, Prins, Wim, & Jochems, 2005). However, many of these approaches focused on analyzing group
discourse. We agree with Naidu and Jarvela (2006) that there is a need to move beyond focusing only on such
analyses and direct attention toward understanding how critical attributes of CSCL contexts interact with group
collaboration as well   as with   individual attributes  of collaborative  learners.   Individual, group  and  context
factors affect the types of interactions and the learning outcomes in a collaborative technology-supported setting
and need to be taken into account while studying the dynamic process of collaborative learning. Analysis of
learning at both the individual and the group unit of analysis is necessary (Stahl, Koschmann & Suthers, 2006)

        Rummel and Spada (2004) argued that in order to "crack" the complex processes that take place in
collaborative contexts we need to work towards developing a "methodological toolbox" which "could support
an informed   choice  of  appropriate  methods   of   analysis"  (p. 23). Quantitative  methods    such   as multilevel
statistical techniques could be useful tools when studying the relationships of variables with different levels and
units of analysis. Such methods enable researchers to model the dependencies in the data and obtain more
accurate relationships between variables of interest. Recent studies on collaborative learning in technology-
supported   settings have  underlined  that  there is  a "multi-faceted   methodological   problem"    in this area   of
research (Fischer, Weinberger, & Mandl, 2004) and there is a need for more accurate research methods (in terms
of validity and reliability) to assess the impact of learning and working in CSCL settings (Valcke & Martens,
2006).

        The   purpose   of this  study was   to understand    how  individual  and   group characteristics   interact to
produce a rich understanding of domain knowledge. More specifically, we used multilevel analysis techniques
to understand how cognitive attributes of collaborative learners might be interacting with group membership to
affect learning. We designed and implemented support for navigation (metanavigation support) in the form of
prompts to enable groups to think about the processes students use while interacting with online science texts
and help them monitor and regulate these processes.

Research Context: Integrating CoMPASS in the science classroom
        This  study   was  a  part  of an   implementation   of  CoMPASS      (Puntambekar,   2006;    Puntambekar    &
Stylianou, 2005; Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Hübscher, 2003; Puntambekar, Stylianou, & Jin, 2001) in sixth
grade science classes. During this implementation, students used CoMPASS as a resource to find information
and read about the science concepts and principles that were involved in the unit of `Simple Machines'.

                                                          685                                                     CSCL 2007
Affordances of CoMPASS
        CoMPASS is a science hypertext system that has two tightly integrated modes of representation: a
textual representation of the content units and a visual representation in a form of concept maps. CoMPASS
maps are dynamically constructed and displayed with a fisheye view based on the strength of the relationships
among concepts, illustrating graphically the relationships among key ideas in the text (see Figure 1). The maps
show the local subnetwork of the domain and where the links lead to, enabling readers to see the relationships
among the text units (concepts) and make thoughtful decisions of what paths to follow without getting lost or
confused. CoMPASS also supports readers to study a science idea in multiple contexts by changing views (top
right of screen in Figure 1).

            Figure 1. Textual and visual representation of information with `work' as focus

        In Figure 1 the reader has chosen to read about work in pulley. Work appears as the focal concept in
the map and the text related to work appears in the right part of the screen. The concepts that are most closely
related to work appear larger and closer to the focus whereas the concepts that are not as closely related to work
appear in the periphery. The maps allow for exploration and support students to take multiple investigation paths
based on their learning goals at any particular time.

Participants
        The    participants in this study   were 121    sixth graders  in  four science classes  being taught  by  two
different teachers. The school was located in a university town in Connecticut. The students were from different
ethnic backgrounds    and   academic  abilities. Each   class  was   randomly    assigned to one   of  two  conditions
(metanavigation  support,   no    support). Approximately     equal  numbers    of students  were  assigned    to each
condition, with variation being due to uneven class sizes.

        Students collaborated in groups of three or four while using CoMPASS to solve the "Pulley design
challenge". The  groups   were    formed based   on teachers'   perception  of  students' academic   ability. Teachers
decided to  form  groups    of mixed   ability   levels so  that students   would   benefit from   each other   during
collaboration. The metanavigation     support    condition    included  11 groups  of   students and   the no  support
condition 15 groups.

Procedures
        The study involved four sessions of 45 minutes that were conducted during the science class period.
The first session involved an assessment of students' metacognitive awareness and perceived use of reading
strategies while reading school-related materials through the MARSI (Mokhtari & Reichard, 2002) instrument.
This inventory was administered online. The second session started with the presentation of the task. The task
was a design challenge that required students to build a pulley device that would lift a bottle of water that
weighed 600 grams off a table using the minimum amount of effort. Students were allowed some time to think
about the requirements of the task and write down their initial ideas. Then, they were asked to collaborate in
groups  to plan their quest    of finding   information  to   solve the challenge.  Groups   were  asked   to read the
information that was available for pulleys in the `Simple Machines' unit in CoMPASS. Groups used CoMPASS
for approximately 25 minutes. During the third session students were asked to continue their quest of searching

                                                          686                                                     CSCL 2007
information  about pulleys  in CoMPASS       and   finalize their pulley   system   designs.   The    groups  in  the
metanavigation support condition received metanavigation prompts in a written format to guide their exploration
in CoMPASS.    Groups   were allowed   to   use CoMPASS     for approximately    25   minutes.   The   fourth session
included an  assessment of   students' individual   science  knowledge   through    a concept    map   test that was
administered in a paper and pencil format.

Providing Metanavigation Support
         Metanavigation support  in  the form   of prompts  was   provided to   the groups  in   the metanavigation
support condition to encourage them to monitor and regulate their navigation strategies in order to gain a rich
understanding of science concepts while reading from hypertext. Metanavigation support was based on two
indices that were informed by group's navigation path while interacting with the CoMPASS system.

         The prompts were contingent upon students' navigation and were customized for each group. Log file
information that captured groups' navigation path enabled us to assess their navigation behavior and decide
what metanavigation prompts would be given to each group. Computer log files recorded information about
what science concepts the groups explored while using CoMPASS, how much time they spent on each concept
and what  navigation  tools they used    to make   their navigation   choices.  Two   main    indices  from   group's
navigation path informed our decision of what type of metanavigation support each group needed: navigation
choices and transitions among text units (see Table 1). Specifically, we were interested in whether or not the
group members had chosen to read about the science concepts that were relevant to their learning goal and
whether the transitions they made among the text units that were available in the hypertext environment would
enable them to gain a rich understanding of the domain. For example, did the group make transitions to related
concepts while reading about science concepts?

Table 1: Group navigation based on log file data

              Log file information       Type                   Description
              Concepts visited           Non-goal related       Do     students     visit  concepts
                                         Goal related           that   are    relevant     to    their
                                                                learning goal?
              Transitions                No coherence             Do  students  make      transitions
                                         Coherence                to  related   concepts      while
                                                                  reading?

Considering the binary state of each of these categories, we could have four different cases, described in the
`metanavigation support rules' cells of Table 2, as well as various combinations.

Table 2: Conditions for providing metanavigation prompts

                                                Metanavigation support rules
                          Navigation        If choice of non goal-related concepts
                          choices            encourage goal-related navigation
                                            If goal-related navigation 
                                            encourage integration of science
                                            knowledge
                          Transitions       If transitions are to not related
                                            concepts encourage regulation of
                                            navigation behavior to make
                                            transitions between text units that are
                                            related while reading
                                            If transitions are to related concepts
                                             encourage integration of science
                                            knowledge

         For example, the log  file data of one  of the  groups indicated  that they  chose   to read  about  science
concepts that were not as relevant for solving the pulley challenge (i.e., `kinetic energy', `potential energy', and

                                                       687                                                       CSCL 2007
`power') and did not read about goal-related science concepts such as `mechanical advantage', `distance', and
`force'. For example, another group was reading about `work'. One possible transition to a related concept
would be to read about `force'.

        The metanavigation prompts were aimed at encouraging students to understand the affordances of the
navigational aids in CoMPASS and use them to guide their navigation. The prompts encouraged students to (a)
think about their goal and (b) to make decisions about which concept to select next. The prompts were designed
to help students use the concept maps in CoMPASS to make thoughtful decisions of what paths to follow. As
mentioned earlier, the concept maps in CoMPASS showed students the concepts were related to one another and
to the topic.

Data Sources and Measures
        Multiple sources of group and individual data were collected over the four sessions. Measures included
student's individual performance in the Metacognitive Awareness of Reading Strategies Inventory (MARSI)
and a concept map test. Process measures included log file information that captured group navigation paths
during the use of CoMPASS.

Pre-Assessment Instruments
        Students' metacognitive awareness and perceived use of reading strategies while reading school-related
materials  was  assessed  through  the Metacognitive  Awareness  of Reading  Strategies Inventory    (MARSI)
(Mokhtari & Reichard, 2002). MARSI consisted of 30 Likert-type items with a 5-point response format (1="I
never or almost never do this", 2="I do this only occasionally", 3="I sometimes do this-about 50% of the time",
4="I usually do this", 5="I always or almost always do this"). An overall total average MARSI score was
calculated for each student indicating how often the student uses reading strategies when reading academic
materials.

Measures during Intervention
        Computer log files were used to look more deeply into the navigation paths of groups of learners in an
attempt   to  detect differences in approaches   to reading  and learning from  hypertext      when  providing
metanavigation support. Log files recorded information about what science concepts the groups explored while
interacting with the CoMPASS system in a chronological order. Two primary dimensions were used for the
analysis of group navigation paths. The first dimension was based on whether groups chose to focus on science
concepts that were related with their task goal. A goal-relatedness index was calculated by dividing the total
number of goal related concepts visited to the total number of concepts visited. The second dimension was
based on whether the groups made transitions to related concepts while reading the different text fragments. A
transition-relatedness index was calculated by dividing the number of transitions to related concepts to the total
number of transitions among concepts.

Post-Assessment Instruments
        A paper and pencil concept map test was used to assess richness of students' understanding of science
concepts. The students were provided with a list of science concepts from which they were asked to create a
concept map providing an explanation for each concept, making connections among concepts and stating how
they are related. Two aspects of the maps were examined: the explanation provided for the concepts and the
explanation provided for the connections among the concepts. Students' concept maps were analyzed using a
rubric that was developed in a study conducted by Puntambekar, Stylianou, and Hübscher (2003). Students'
responses were scored on a scale of 0-3 based on the depth of science understanding that they demonstrated. A
score of 0 indicated an incorrect explanation, while a score of 3 indicated a complete and clear explanation for
the concept or the connection. A concept ratio was calculated for each student by dividing the score that was
given for the explanation of the concepts by the number of concepts included in the concept map. This ratio was
a measure of student's understanding of science concepts. A connection ratio was calculated by dividing the
score that was given for the explanation of the connections with the number of connections in the map. This
ratio was a measure of the depth of understanding of the relationships among science concepts.

Investigations and Data Analyses
        The main research question that was addressed in this study was: To what extent can concept maps
scores (explanations of concepts and explanations of connections) of students be predicted from the presence of
metanavigation support while interacting with science texts, their individual metacognitive awareness of reading
strategies and the group navigation behavior?

                                                      688                                                  CSCL 2007
        In order  to analyze the data    for this study,  multilevel analysis techniques  were used (Bryk &
Raudenbush, 1992) with the use of the software HLM 6.01 for windows. Multilevel analysis techniques are
helpful for taking into account dependencies that occur in datasets that have hierarchical structures. Accounting
for such dependencies is especially important in order to reach more accurate estimates of the effectiveness of
each independent variable on the outcome variable of interest. For the purpose of the current study, the data
were gathered and analyzed on two levels. Level 1 included variables that were gathered on the individual
student level; level 2 included variables that were gathered on the group level since the students were nested
within groups.

        Two-level HLM models were tested on two outcome variables. The first outcome variable was the
concept ratio  (CONCR),  a measure    of student's  understanding of  science  concepts. The second  outcome
variable was the connection ratio (CONNECTR), a measure of the depth of understanding of the relationships
among science concepts. For each outcome variable, the HLM analyses were performed in three stages. At the
first stage, a null model was tested in which no independent variables were included in the analysis. The results
produced by this model were comparable to random effects ANOVA which measured the variance within and
between groups. At the second stage, the student-level independent variables were added to the model, while at
the third stage the group-level independent variables were added. The independent variables were added to the
model based on theory. However, cross-level interactions that were not significant were deleted from the final
models.

        The level 1 data included student level characteristics, which were those of the student's metacognitive
awareness and perceived use of reading strategies while reading school-related materials (MARSI). The level 2
data included group level characteristics which were those of the condition that the students were in (whether
they received metacognitive support or not), as well as the two navigation dimensions that were used for the
analysis of group navigation paths. The first dimension was the goal-relatedness index (GOALNAV), a measure
of whether groups chose to focus on science concepts that were related with their goal. The second dimension
was the transition-relatedness index (TRANSNAV), a measure of whether the groups made transitions to related
concepts while interacting with CoMPASS.

        Table 3 includes a more detailed description of the variables used in the analysis. More specifically
some descriptive statistics, such as the means, standard deviations as well as the minimum and maximum values
of each variable are presented. As shown in Table 3, there was a difference in the averages of the two scores
derived from students' concept maps (concept ratio and connection ratio). The average concept ratio score was
higher than the average connection ratio score. It seems that students did not provide many complete and clear
explanations for the connections among concepts in their concept map (mean=0.8). The table also shows that the
average score of the goal-related navigation index was higher than the average score of the transition-relatedness
index. Groups were better in choosing to read about science concepts that were related with their goal than
making transitions to related text segments. As far as students' metacognitive awareness of reading strategies is
concerned, it seems that on average students reported that they usually apply reading strategies when reading
academic or school related material.

Table 3: Description of variables used in the models.

Name           Description                                Level      Type     Minimum Maximum Mean SD
CONCR          Concept Ratio in Concept Map                 1     Outcome       0.00       2.75     1.32 .63
CONNECTR       Connection Ratio in Concept Map              1     Outcome       0.00       1.60     0.80 .34
MARSI          Metacognitive Awareness of Reading           1     Predictor     1.30       4.70     3.11 .71
               Strategies Score
CONDITION Indicator of whether the groups                   2     Predictor
               received metacognitive support or not
GOALNAV        Goal-related Navigation Index                2     Predictor     0.00       1.00     0.66 .31
TRANSNAV Transition-relatedness Index                       2     Predictor     0.00       1.00     0.57 .28

Results
Predicting Connection Ratio in the Concept Map Test
        The first analysis that was performed wanted to examine the depth of understanding of the relationship
among science concepts. This depth of understanding, also called the connection ratio (CONNECTR) was the
first dependent variable that was examined with HLM.   Equations 1-3 represent the final model for this sample.

                                                      689                                                 CSCL 2007
Through these models we attempted to explain the differences that students hold in their depth of understanding
of relationships More specifically, equation 1 represents the effects of each student's MARSI score on the
CONNECTR     variable. This equation   examined  whether     each student's metacognitive   awareness   of reading
strategies had an effect on their depth of understanding of relationships. Equation 2 represents the group level
main effects of CONDITION, TRANSNAV and GOALNAV. This equation examined whether (a) the condition
that the students were in (whether they had received support or not); (b) whether each student's group made
transitions to related concepts; and (c) whether each student's group focused on concepts that were related to
their goals, had an effect on their depth of understanding of relationships. Finally, equation 3 represents the
interaction between the condition that each group was in with each student's MARSI score.

Level-1 Model (Student level)
         CONNECTR =  0+ 1*(MARSI) + R                                                                          (1)

Level-2 Model (Group level)
          0= 00 + 01*(CONDITION) + 02*(TRNSNAV) + 03*(GOALNAV) + Uo                                            (2)
         1= 10 + 11*(CONDITION)                                                                                (3)

Table 4. Coefficients of the Connection Ratio Model.

Effect                        Symbol Coefficient        Standard error      T-ratio Approximate df         p-value
OVERALL INTERCEPT             0        0.411            0.160               2.560   22                     0.018
CONDITION                     1        0.692            0.242               2.866   22                     0.009
TRNSNAV                       01       0.019            0.136               0.139   22                     0.891
GOALNAV                       02       0.324            0.119               2.713   22                     0.013
MARSI                         03       0.039            0.041               0.948   81                     0.346
CONDITION*MARSI               11       -0.169           0.068               -2.503  81                     0.015

         As shown in Table 4, the students who were placed in groups with higher levels of goal navigation,
also had higher levels of CONNECTR       scores (02=0.324,    p=0.013).  This indicates  that the students  whose
groups chose to focus  on concepts  that were   related to their  goals had more  depth  of understanding   of the
relationships among the concepts. However, the levels of TRANSNAV that the groups held (whether the groups
made transitions to related concepts) did not appear to have any effects on the student's depth of understanding
(03=0.019,  p=0.891).  The  results of this analysis    have also  shown  a  significant interaction between   the
condition that the students were in (whether they had received support or not), with the student's metacognitive
awareness (MARSI) (11=-0.169, p=0.015). The negative sign of the gamma weight indicates that the students
who had received support, but who had lower levels of metacognitive awareness, also had lower levels of depth
of understanding. Based on the same relationship, the students who had not received support, but who had high
levels of metacognitive awareness also had lower levels of depth of understanding.

         In order to determine the percentage of variance explained by the models, it was important to estimate
the baseline variance that was accounted for in the null model, when no independent variables are added. Based
on the unconditional model, the percentage of variance between groups was 11.09%.     As a next step, the level 1
predictor (MARSI) was included in the model. Although this variable did not help explain any of the level 1
variance, it was kept in the model in order to test for its interaction with the condition. However, the addition of
the MARSI variable did help explain 15.9% of the variance at level 2.     Finally, when the final complete model
was run, it was able to explain 3.3% of the variance in level 1, and 99.73% of the variance in level 2.

Predicting Concept Ratio in the Concept Map Test
         The procedures that were mentioned above were also performed with the concept ratio (CONCR) as
the dependent variable, which measured the student's understanding of science concepts. As a first step, the
same complete model that was used above was tested with CONCR as the outcome variable. Since none of the
coefficients were significant however, a stepwise deletion process was preformed. Equations 4-6 describe the
final model that was used for this dependent variable.

         Level-1 Model (Student level)
                 Y = 0 + 1*(MARSI) + R                                                                         (4)

                                                       690                                                    CSCL 2007
        Level-2 Model (Group level)
                   B0 = 00 + 01*(CONDITION) + Uo                                                               (5)
                   B1 = 10                                                                                     (6)

        Equation 4 represents the level 1 effects of each student's MARSI score on the CONCR variable. More
specifically, this equation examined whether each student's metacognitive awareness of reading strategies had
an effect on their depth of understanding of science concepts. Equation 5 represents the group level main effects
of condition, which demonstrated whether the condition that the students were in (whether they had received
support or not) had an effect on their understanding of science concepts.   Finally, equation 6 demonstrates that
the effect of the student's metacognitive awareness on their understanding of science concepts is fixed, meaning
that the relationship between metacognitive awareness and the student's understanding of science concepts is
the same across all groups.

Table 5.    Coefficients of the Concept Ratio Model.

Effect                       Symbol       Coefficient  Standard error       T-ratio   Approximate df      p-value
OVERALL INTERCEPT 0                       0.842        0.226                3.729     24                  0.001
CONDITION                    1            0.359        0.129                2.784     24                  0.011
MARSI                        10           0.100        0.069                1.442     84                  0.153

        Table 5 describes the effect that each variable had on the dependent variable of interest (CONCR). The
independent variable of MARSI was not significant in explaining the student's CONCR scores (10=-0.100,
p=0.153).   This indicates  that the metacognitive  awareness   of the  students  did  not have   anys  statistically
significant effect on their understanding of science concepts. However, the condition was significant (1=0.359,
p=0.011), indicating that the students whose groups had received support, had higher levels of understanding.

        In order to determine the percentage of variance explained by this second model, the baseline variance
was estimated from the null model, where no independent variables were added. Based on the unconditional
model, the  percentage of   variance between   groups was    only 7.93%.   As a   next step,  the level 1 predictor
(MARSI) was included in the model, which did not help explain any of the variance in any of the two levels.
Finally, when the final complete model was run, it was able to explain 0.03% of the variance in level 1, and
96.02% of the variance in level 2.

Discussion and Conclusions
        In this study we used multilevel analysis techniques to understand how critical attributes of a context
(provision of metanavigation support to groups while reading from hypertext) interact with group collaboration
(group navigation  behavior)  as   well  as with  individual attributes of collaborating   students (metacognitive
awareness of reading strategies) to affect individual learning outcomes (understanding of domain knowledge
assessed through a concept map    test). An overall result that can be concluded from this study is that  providing
metanavigation support to the groups seems to have contributed positively in enabling students to gain a rich
understanding of domain knowledge and have higher scores in the concept map assessment task. The predictive
models that were generated using multilevel analysis techniques for both outcome measures in the concept map
assessment task, suggest that the variability in concept maps scores (explanations of concepts and explanations
of connections) at the group level was accounted for by the presence of metanavigation support. Although the
group level variance was very small, for both outcome measures in the concept map test we were able to explain
almost all of the group variance.

        The variability in the scores for the explanations of the connections that each student provided in
his/her concept map was accounted by the presence of metanavigation support, the goal related navigation index
and by an interaction of his/her MARSI score with the presence of metanavigation support. The presence of
metanavigation   support and  the  goal  related navigation  index had   positive significant main  effects on the
variability of the explanations   of connections  among  concepts   in  students'  concept   maps.   Students who
collaborated in groups that were given metanavigation support and chose to read about concepts relevant to their
learning goal gained a deeper understanding of the relationships among science concepts than students who
were not given metanavigation support and did not choose to read about goal-related concepts. Our findings also
indicate that there was a significant negative interaction of students' metacognitive awareness and perceived use
of reading strategies while reading from traditional texts and the presence of metanavigation support while
interacting with hypertext. If a student had a low MARSI score (reported that he/she is not using frequently

                                                        691                                                    CSCL 2007
reading strategies while reading from traditional texts) the metanavigation support seems not to have helped
him/her gain a rich understanding of the domain, as shown in his/her explanations of connections concept map
score. Also students who had a high MARSI score but were not provided with metanavigation support did not
gain a rich understanding of the domain.   Providing metanavigation support to groups whose members reported
more frequent use of reading strategies might have stimulated collaborative interactions which led to deeper
understanding of the relationships among science concepts.

         Another finding    of the study  was  that the   models  that were   created using  the multilevel analysis
techniques were not effective in explaining the variance at the student level. The MARSI score was not a
significant predictor   of students'   performance  in    the concept   map   test (explanations  of   concepts and
explanations of connections). Other variables need to be used to predict the variance at the individual level.
Reading  comprehension     and  prior  domain  knowledge     were found  to   be significant predictors of  students'
understanding of domain knowledge when we used regression analyses (Stylianou & Puntambekar, 2004). In
this study  we chose   to  add the MARSI      variable at the  student level  because  we  were  more   interested in
determining how metacognitive awareness of reading strategies interacts with group level characteristics (group
navigation behavior and provision of metanavigation support to the groups).

         Overall, applying Hierarchical Linear Modeling enabled us to model the dependencies in the data (in
our case students within groups) and obtain more accurate relationships among the variables of interest. We
argue  that multilevel  analysis techniques   can help    us  unravel  some   aspects of the complex    collaborative
processes that take place in a technology-supported setting.     For example, the communalities and dependencies
that exist in various characteristics of students who are in the same groups violate the assumptions of many
parametric test procedures such as Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and Regression. If we were to use such
methods, no inferences of individual behavior would have been made based on the behavior of the group. In
order to account for   dependencies    within the group,  proper  statistical analyses  such as  Hierarchical Linear
Modeling could be used. It is important, though, to study collaborative processes from multiple perspectives
(Hmelo-Silver, 2003; Rummel & Spada, 2004) and apply different methodological approaches (quantitative as
well as qualitative methods) to understand the complexity of interactions and learning in such dynamic contexts.

         Our future research plans are to "crack" the collaborative interactions of groups by examining audio
data of peer interactions during navigation. We plan to focus on groups whose members had high MARSI but
not  given  support and   groups whose   members    which    had  high MARSI     scores  but not given  support and
investigate the negative interaction in the connection ratio predictive model. We will attempt to understand the
richness of information contained in a collaborative interaction and identify what aspects characterize good
collaboration which might lead to in-depth understanding of domain knowledge. Such analyses can contribute to
our  understanding   of the    reading comprehension      processes   employed   while   interacting with  hypertext.
Identifying how readers navigate digital texts and what kind of support they need while processing nonlinear
information will be an important contribution in the hypertext as well as the literacy research fields.

References
Bryk, A.S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical linear models. Newbury Park: CA: Sage Publications.
Chinn, C. A., O'Donnell, A. M., & Jinks, T. S. (2000). The structure of discourse in collaborative learning.
      Journal of Experimental Education, 69(1), 77 -97.
De Wever, B., Schellens, T., Valcke, M., & Van Keer, H. (2005). Content analysis schemes to analyze
      transcripts of online asynchronous discussion groups: A review. Computers & Education, 46(1), 6­28.
Fischer, F., Weinberger, A., & Mandl, H. (2004). Cracking the nut - but which nutcracker to use? Diversity to
      approaches to analyzing 23 collaborative processes in technology-supported settings. In Y. B. Kafai, W. A.
      Sandoval, N. Enyedy, A. S. Nixon, & F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
      of the Learning Sciences - Embracing Diversity in the Learning Sciences (pp. 23-26). Mahwah, NJ:
      Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2003). Analyzing collaborative knowledge construction: Multiple methods for integrated
      understanding. Computers and Education, 41, 397-420.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of the Learning
      Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P., & Jochems, W. (2003). Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in computer-
      supported collaborative learning environments: A review of the research. Computers in Human Behavior,
      19, 335­353.
Mokhtari, K., & Reichard, C. A. (2002). Assessing students' metacognitive awareness of reading strategies.
      Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 249-259.

                                                          692                                                   CSCL 2007
Naidu, S. & Jarvela, S. (2006). Analyzing CMC content for what? Computers & Education, 46(1), pp. 96
Puntambekar, S. (2006). Learning from Digital Text in Inquiry-Based Science Classes: Lessons Learned in One
    Program. In S. A., Barab, K. E Hay & D. T. Hickey (Eds.) Making a difference: Proceedings of the
    seventh International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) (pp. 564-570). Mahwah: NJ. Erlbaum
Puntambekar, S. & Stylianou, A. (2005). Designing navigation support in hypertext systems based on navigation
    patterns. Journal of Instructional Science, 33, 451-481.
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Hübscher, R. (2003). Improving navigation and learning in hypertext
    environments with navigable concept maps. Human Computer Interaction, 18(4), 395-426.
Puntambekar, S., Stylianou, A., & Jin, Q. (2001). Visualization and external representations in educational
    hypertext systems. In J. D. Moore, C. L. Redfield & W. L. Johnson (Eds.) Artificial Intelligence in
    Education, AI-ED in the wired and wireless world (pp. 13-22). IOS Press, Netherlands.
Reffay, C. & Chanier, T. (2003). How social network analysis cam help to measure cohesion in collaborative
    distance-learning. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for change in networked
    learning environments. Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Support for
    Collaborative Learning (CSCL) (pp. 343-352). Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Rummel, N. & Spada, H (2004). Cracking the nut ­ but which nutcracker to use? Diversity in approaches to
    analyzing collaborative processes in technology-supported settings. Proceedings of the Sixth International
    Conference of the Learning Sciences, UCLA, Santa Monica (pp. 23-26).
Stahl, G., Koschmann, T, & Suthers, D. (2006). CSCL: An historical perspective. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.)
    Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences (pp. 409-426.) Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
    Press.
Strijbos, J. W, Martens, R. L., Prins, F. J., & Jochems, W. M. G. (2005). Content analysis: What are they talking
    about? Computers & Education, 46(1), 29­48.
Stylianou, A. & Puntambekar, S. (2004). Understanding the role of metacognition while reading from nonlinear
    resources. Paper presented at the Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Santa
    Barbara, CA.
Valcke, M & Martens R. (2006). The problem arena of researching computer supported collaborative learning.
    Computers & Education, 46(1), 1-5.
Wortham, D. W. (1999). Nodal and matrix analyses of communication patterns in small groups. In C. Hoadley
    & J. Roschelle, Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative
    Learning (CSCL) (pp.681-686). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Science Foundation's early career grant (CAREER #9985158) to Dr.
Sadhana Puntambekar. We thank the students and teachers who participated in the study.

                                                   693                                                       CSCL 2007
