     Technology in a Context: Enabling students to collaboratively
      participate at the interface of computation and social science
                                           Richard Alterman, Johann Larusson
                                              Computer Science Department
                                Volen Center for Complex Systems, Brandeis University
                                     415 South Street, Waltham, MA,       02454   USA
                                  alterman@cs.brandeis.edu, johann@cs.brandeis.edu

         Abstract:   This   paper  explores   the use  of  reflective  collaborative technology   to  organize   the
         collaboration   within a  class  so  as to produce    computer science   students  who  learn   to develop
         technology within a critical framework.       A case study is presented that shows how technology can
         be used to produce objects of reflection and analysis for the multi-disciplinary theoretical analysis
         of online activity.

Introduction
    For a number of years the first author has been teaching a suite of courses in a Computer Science department
that try to put computation, and technology in general, in a context. The culture of Computer Science tends to be
antithetical to any kind of critical stance towards the analysis, design, engineering, and deployment of technology.
In Computer Science, theory is equated to formalization and practice to technique.          The context of computation, the
actors and their various concerns, the interface of technology, social science, and the humanities, is mostly ignored
or trivialized.  Students trained in this tradition are not easily coaxed into exploring the interface of technology with
disciplines outside the sciences, nor do they as a group appreciate the rigor of non-formal theoretical work.               The
standard model of teaching in Computer Science is to douse students with a fire hose of technology and information.
Students learn   to organize  and  retain information   despite   very high  baud rates  of information.    This approach    to
education is not conducive to either a critical stance or reflection, both of which are requisite for learning at the
interface of technology and social science.      A different pace of action ­ with opportunities to pause and reflect, be
discursive and thoughtful ­ is required for an educational practice that invites reflection.

    Students    outside of  computer  science    would also benefit   from  a more   reflective approach    to  learning about
technology in a context.     Examples of the set of tasks, topics, and fields that compose this second population are
informatics, library   research and  the  digital library, computer    supported  cooperative   work,  the  internet,  graphic
design, scientific visualization and animation, education, and economics and business. These students require a basic
understanding of computation/internet as an important form of mediation, how computation functions in a context,
but they also   need to  be  able to use  the technology   to  mediate  their work   and to  understand  the    context  of the
technology.  For these students, there exists a very interesting relation between the object of study (technology) and
the means of study (technology): it is reflective.

    This   paper  will  focus on  the use  of    collaborative groupware    technology   to explore  the    interface between
technology   and  social science.    The  use  of   reflective collaborative  technology  helps  students    to practice  with
alternate disciplinary frameworks, developing multi-disciplinary ways of orienting and methods of operation. The
basic idea is to have students work online, record their work into transcripts that are reviewable, and then analyze
the transcripts. This serves a range of theoretical and practical functions.   The reflective technology enables students
to exploit the   reflective relationship between    what  they  are learning  and how   their learning   is mediated.    Other
efforts on the role of technology in reflection and education have emphasized how computers can support student
reflection as the students learn the course material (Collins & Brown, 1988); for example, in a knowledge-building
community    (Scardamalia    &  Bereiter, 1994)   the  technology   supports  students as   they reflect and    construct new
knowledge relevant to the content of the course, say environmental studies.        Reflective technology, of the sort that
we are interested in, gives students reviewable transcripts of their online activities, and these transcripts are directly
relevant to their education about technology.

    All of the collaborative platforms we have developed in our lab produce transcripts of user behavior that are
reviewable   and  replayable.   The   production    of transcripts  of online  collaborative    behavior serves   a   range  of
theoretical and practical functions:

                                                               69                                                     CSCL 2007
         1.    The exercise of collecting transcripts teaches experimental design and methods.
         2.    The participation of the students in   data collection exercises gives students first hand experiences with
               online collaboration.
         3.    The   first hand   experience   of the students    as both collectors    of   data  and participants  in  online
               collaboration are an object of reflection.
         4.    The transcripts provide concrete data for exploring and evaluating a theoretical framework.
         5.    The transcripts are a source of design problems and also a testing ground for design innovation.
         6.    The transcripts provide concrete data for teaching and practicing various kinds of analysis methods.
         7.    The collection of transcripts is a shared repository of data for term projects.
         8.    The transcripts are a basis for classroom discussion.

Integrating Reflective Technology into the Classroom
         This paper presents a case study of a class at Brandeis University that used collaborative technology as a
foundation    for course   material that  puts technology  in  an  interdisciplinary   context.   The  case  study reprises   the
details of a course that taught multi-disciplinary theories of intersubjectivity to computer science undergraduate and
graduate students. In this course, technology was used to record the student's own online collaborative activity in a
representational form that was reviewable and thereby accessible as an object of analysis and reflection.            The use of
the  collaborative   technology   gave   students  first-hand  experience   with   the object   of study,    supporting student
learning for the entire range of research and development activities, both theoretical and practical, from theory, to
method, to evaluation.      The class was composed of a mix of graduate (13) and undergraduate (15) students. The
material in the course was conceptually difficult.

         The   first part  of the semester   was  spent working      through a demanding     reading   list, especially for   the
computer science students whose orientation is primarily technical; the topic was intersubjectivity. Making this kind
of interdisciplinary theoretical material relevant to a class of students who are largely computer scientists is not a
trivial task. The material is relevant to the technical development of online environments that support collaborative
effort within a community.     If nothing else, the theoretical material explains why many network-mediated activities
or  organizations    think their  virtual community    is an   impoverished    form    of collaboration   when    contrasted  to
communities that regularly meet face-to-face.       But the theoretical material has more relevance than that. The first
step towards   integrating   mediated   forms  of  interaction into  emerging  or  existing   communities     of  practice is to
understand the requirements. Only then is one in a position to design and engineer environments that best match the
practice given the constraints of the technology.     Other value can also be achieved by understanding what cannot be
done and why not.     It is also a bit of a surprise for computer science students to discover that what occurs online is a
significant source of data for navigating safe passage through contentious theoretical waters.

     During the second part of the semester the students practiced methods of transcript analysis.           The last part of the
semester was a workshop where the class collectively worked at reading transcripts as they proceeded with their
term projects; the class also continued to read papers.        The   use of  collaborative   technology   to  create objects  of
reflection and analysis was critical to the development of the students' practice.

         The class used wiki-based technology called CEDAR throughout the semester. CEDAR enables students to
collaborate same time/different place vis-à-vis a wiki. It provides students with a set of "What You See Is What I
See" (WYSIWIS) components: a public chat, shared Wiki editor, shared web browser, and a document overview
that displays a map of the Wiki structure that the users create and maintain. Replayable transcripts of online user
activity are automatically recorded.      A replay device enables students to review their online activity as if they were
viewing a videotape.

         CEDAR was initially introduced to the students one month into the semester. CEDAR was used to give the
students some hands-on experience with online collaboration and prepare for data collection exercises. The class
was divided into teams of 2 to 5 students who engaged in a collaborative task. Because CEDAR was still in beta
stage, these   exercises   provided  an   opportunity for some     motivated  discussion   of design   for   use. The   data  we
collected was used for exercises in class that forced students to apply various kinds of transcript analysis methods.
Analysis of   the  data  was  also  featured   on the exam    that assessed  their skill  at applying  the   transcript reading
techniques they had been taught, and provided a basis for term project proposals.

                                                               70                                                     CSCL 2007
   During class, the initial set of data was replayed to apply theoretical concepts to concrete data and teach the
students the transcript reading techniques. The initial replay device was very slow, so it was rebuilt. Some of the
students created additional tools for analyzing the transcripts: shell scripts extracted and displayed the chat among
the users in chronological order; they also produced logs of the users' activities at the level of "He is chatting" or
"He downloaded a file".

   Students were encouraged to bring their laptops to class so they could break out into smaller groups and practice
transcript analysis. The initial set of data was also used as a basis for their term project proposal. Each proposal was
required to include at least one segment of transcript to illustrate their idea. Examples of topics include: visualizing
awareness between participants, division of labor, interruptions, and leadership within groups.

   The   class  engaged   in a redesign    task. The  plan  was    to redesign  CEDAR      for a second   set of data collection
exercises. Time constraints limited the changes that could be made to CEDAR. As a result of class discussion, two
additional   features were  implemented.       The  data collection    exercise was  modified    so it would    provide  a   more
interesting set of data. The goal here was to prevent the employment of a "divide-and-conquer" strategy among the
team. This would encourage more interaction and joint sensemaking among the users. These uses of the technology
helped   the students  to develop   the  scientific  practice of experimental    design.   They  also  enabled   the  students to
produce data that would improve their project results.

   The class collected a second set of data using the new task and the modified version of CEDAR. This exercise
provided the students with a more carefully engineered set of data that better supported their term project work. It
also completed the redesign cycle by presenting the class with the opportunity to critically reflect on the tasks of
interface design and experimental design.

   Some analysis was done of the effect of integrating the production of objects of reflection and analysis into the
framework for the course.      The  range,    scope, and quality   of  the term  projects  provided   significant  evidence   that
using collaborative technology to support reflection enabled students to participate at the interface of computation
and social science.    With  but  a few    exceptions,  the term   projects uniformly  demonstrated    significant    progress at
understanding   the   theoretical topics discussed   in  class. The   projects  showed  that   the students   were  able  to  take
abstract theoretical ideas and apply them to the close analysis of detailed transcripts of online activity.          Without the
in-class participation  and  practice   at reading   and analyzing     transcripts, showing    the relevance   of  theory  to the
dynamics and concreteness of online activity, it would have been much more difficult for students to make the leap
­ much of the class would have been lost.

   At the end of the semester we handed out a survey to the students asking theoretical and practical questions
about the course topics and structure and the value of the CEDAR technology.                93% of the students said that the
CEDAR     technology   is useful  for studying   and   applying  the   theoretical  topics covered  in the  class.   82%   of the
students  stated that  having     access   to replayable  transcripts   made    the  theoretical   papers read   in  class   more
comprehensible. 79% thought the availability of transcripts was helpful in choosing a topic for their term project.
82% believed   that   the second  set of   data was  more   relevant   to their term projects.   75%   believed  that transcripts
helped to focus the interface redesign task.
   The survey also yielded the following representative comments from the students: "It helps you understand the
task better to do it yourself. It gives more insight into how groups collaborate, how joint sense is achieved. It is
easier to look at data from a task you are familiar with."       "When we see the transcripts, the examples correlate with
the theoretical stuff we read about. We can relate examples we see to the theory and challenge the theory."               "Some
of the papers were clarified or made concrete by examples from our transcripts."

References
Collins A. & Brown, J.S. (1988) The Computer as a Tool for                Learning through Reflection.         In Mandl H. &
         Lesgold A. (Eds.) Learning Issues for Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 1-18.
Scardamalia,     M.   and  Bereiter,    M.    (1994)   Computer       Support   for  Knowledge-Building          Communities.
         Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.

Acknowledgments
   This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. EIA-0082393.

                                                                71                                                     CSCL 2007
