   A Framework for Eclectic Analysis of Collaborative Interaction
                              Daniel Suthers, Nathan Dwyer, Richard Medina, Ravi Vatrapu
                                    Laboratory for Interactive Learning Technologies
                     Dept. of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Hawai`i at Manoa
                              1680 East West Road, POST 309, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA
                                         collaborative-representations@hawaii.edu

          Abstract: The interactional structure of learning practices is a central focus of study for CSCL,
          although challenges remain in developing and pursuing a systematic research agenda in the field.
          Different  analytic approaches    produce    complementary    insights, but   comparison    is hampered   by
          incompatible   representations   of the   object of study.  Sequential  interaction  analysis  is promising
          but must   be  scaled  to   distributed   and   asynchronously   mediated   settings. Building     on  recent
          analytic work within our laboratory, we propose a framework for analysis that is founded on the
          concepts of media coordinations and uptake, and utilizes an abstract transcript representation, the
          dependency    graph,   that   is suitable  for   use  by  multiple    analytical traditions    and supports
          examination of sequential structure at larger scales.

Introduction
          Learning   in collaboration   with  others   is the foundation   of Computer     Supported  Collaborative    Learning
(CSCL). An overview of the historical development of the field (Stahl, Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006) reveals the
presence of several research traditions, including an analytic tradition that began with a conception of collaboration
as a "continued attempt to construct and maintain a shared conception of a problem" (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995).
More recently, there have been calls to focus work in the field on the study of "the practices of meaning-making in
the context of joint activity" (Koschmann, 2002) or "intersubjective meaning-making" (Suthers, 2006b), from which
"group cognition" (Stahl, 2006) emerges. The common emphasis is on the interactional structure of collaborative
learning. Diverse lines of work exist in CSCL: we study interaction in different media, examine phenomena ranging
from micro-episodes in small groups to large communities over periods of weeks to months, and analyze data using
various   "qualitative" and   "quantitative"   analytic   approaches.   In order  to  enable  the  cross-pollination     of these
different lines of   work, there is   a need   for  shared  definitions and   a common     formalism.    The work   in  our  own
laboratory spans    some   of this  diversity, including     study of  co-present and   distributed   interaction   with  various
synchronous    and   asynchronous     media,   and  applying   experimental     and  ethnographic   methodologies      at   scales
including  pairs, small   groups   and   online   communities.     Because  of  this diversity  in our    own   work,   we  have
encountered   the need   for  greater theoretical   and   methodological   dialogue; a  need  that also   exists in the  field of
CSCL as a whole. We are committed to studying collaborative learning as a mediated interactional accomplishment,
but wish to do so in settings beyond micro-episodes of synchronous interaction, and to apply a mixture of methods
for hypothesis generation and testing. In this paper, we report on a framework for eclectic analysis of collaborative
interaction that we have developed for our own work, in hopes that adoption by others may increase dialogue within
the field as well. The framework is based on the concept of uptake and a few associated theoretical commitments
that are necessary to define interaction as a common object of study. The primary feature of this framework is an
abstract  transcript notation--the    dependency     graph--that    offers  a   common     representational  basis  for   diverse
analytic methods applied to various media and interactional situations. The remainder of this paper documents the
motivations, theoretical foundation, and practical aspects of the framework that has resulted, with selected examples.

Motivations
          The approach    is  based on   several   years  of  our  own  analytic work,  initiated  to expose    the practices  of
mediated collaborative learning in data from our prior experimental studies. In an analysis undertaken in order to
understand how knowledge building was accomplished via synchronous chat and evidence mapping tools, we used
the concept of uptake to track interaction distributed across these tools (Suthers, 2006a). Subsequently, we began
analyzing  asynchronous    interaction   involving   threaded  discussion   and  evidence   mapping    tools (Suthers,   Dwyer,
Vatrapu, & Medina, 2007). The uptake analytic framework was further developed to handle the asynchronicity and
multiple workspaces of these data. Below we summarize the view of learning underlying our current work, assess
prevalent  analysis  methodologies    in   relation to  our  needs, and  then   discuss additional  requirements    for  eclectic
methodologies.

                                                               694                                                     CSCL 2007
Learning as an Interactive Process
          Although   we  believe   that the framework     we   offer   in this paper  can   support   analyses under    a  variety of
views of learning, the framework is motivated by our own views of how learning takes place in social settings. We
conceive of learning as an interactional process of change. This conception of learning as interactional is compatible
with  theories of  learning that   identify individuals   (Beck,     1997;  Chi,  Bassok,   Lewis,    Reimann,    & Glaser,    1989),
socially  embedded    individuals   (Doise  &   Mugny,    1984;     Vygotsky,    1978), social   systems    (Engestrom,     2001), or
communities    (Wenger,  1998)     as the locus   of change.    Learning    need  not be  deliberately   sought:   it is  a result of
participants'  attempts  to make    sense  of a   situation.  Meaning-making,      as we    call it  in this paper,   takes place  at
multiple levels: solving a problem, maintaining interpersonal relationships, and/or affirming identity in a community
(Bronckart, 1995). To study learning in social settings we must necessarily study individual trajectories of meaning-
making and how they intertwine in practices of intersubjective meaning-making (Suthers, 2006b). In such settings,
the meaning of a given contribution is best understood as a function of its relationships to prior interactions, and
indexically with respect to the physical and social context (Koschmann, Zemel, & Stahl, 2004). Meaning-making is
mediated by the physical and social environment in diverse ways (Wenger, 1998; Wertsch, 1998). As designers of
media for online learning, this mediation gives us an avenue for influencing meaning-making and learning through
the social affordances of the tools that we design (Suthers, 2006b).

Statistical Aggregation
          Many   approaches     to the  study  of  learning   follow   a   quantitative paradigm      in which    contributions    (or
elements of contributions) are annotated according to a well-specified coding scheme (e.g., De Wever, Schellens,
Valcke,   &  Van  Keer,  2006;  Rourke,    Anderson,    Garrison,    &  Archer,   2000).  Statistical   methods   are then    used to
characterize  aggregate  behaviors    that  may   then be  compared       across  experimental   conditions.   This   approach    has
three significant    strengths. First,  a   coding   scheme      is  a concrete    classification    of  behaviors    that  supports
mathematical methods for estimating consistency (reliability) between multiple analysts. Second, the approach has
well defined statistical methods for comparing results from multiple sources of data such as experimental conditions
and replications of studies. Third, this approach can scale up analysis by quantifying data across large groups. The
trade-off is that  "coding  and    counting"  obscures    the sequential   structure  and   situated  methods  of   the  interaction.
"Coding" assigns the meaning of an act as an isolated unit, and therefore either does not take the indexicality of this
meaning into account or fails to record the evidence on which the analyst relied in making a judgment. "Counting"
or statistical aggregation loses the sequential methods by which media affordances are used in particular learning
accomplishments, making it more difficult to identify important design elements at the same temporal and spatial
grain as the actual interaction itself.

Sequential Analysis
          A contrasting approach finds the significance of each act in the context of the unfolding interaction. This
approach    includes Conversation     Analysis  (Goodwin      &  Heritage,  1990;   Sacks,  Schegloff,    &  Jefferson,   1974)   and
Interaction Analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995). Typically, these methods repeatedly examine the micro-structure
of short interaction segments to uncover the methods by which participants make their actions accountable to each
other (Garfinkel, 1967). This approach is a complement to statistical aggregation and has the opposite strengths and
weaknesses. These methods document the actual practices of learning by attending to the sequential structure of the
interaction,  producing  detailed     descriptions   that are   deeply    situated in   the medium      of   interaction.  However,
sequential analyses are often time consuming to produce and difficult to generalize to different media or groups. A
micro-analysis can capture sequential properties because analysis is focused on short interactions that an analyst can
view and review, but progressively larger structures escape its grasp. The family of methods loosely classified as
"exploratory   sequential   data   analysis"   (Sanderson     &     Fisher, 1994)    address     some    of  these  concerns      with
computational support for statistical and grammatical analysis (Olson, Herbsleb, & Rueter, 1994).

Additional Requirements
          The  different environments       and   media   under     examination    have spawned       multiple environment-       and
medium-specific analytic notations. For example, ethnography relies to a large extent on freeform notes taken by
observers. Studies of conversation have used simple transcripts of utterances (Roschelle, 1992) and more detailed
transcripts using Jeffersonian notation (Sacks et al., 1974). Video has become the standard recording medium for
studies  of practice (Jordan    &  Henderson,   1995;   Koschmann       et  al., 2004). Video    analysis   tools (e.g.,  Pea, 2006;
Woods,    2006)  provide  support   for  exploring   and   annotating     video  records,   but  the  annotations  are   tied  to this
medium.     Online interaction  simplifies    the creation    of transcriptions:   software     tools can   record  a detailed    and

                                                                 695                                                        CSCL 2007
comprehensive log of an interaction. However, online media introduce asynchronicity and hide the production of
contributions  (Clark   &  Brennan,    1991),  introducing    different demands     on   analytic notations.    Analysis   of the
simultaneous use of many communication media and channels has relied on ad hoc, eclectic representations (see, for
example,   Hmelo-Silver,   2003;    Suthers,  2006a).  Because  interaction    relies on many    different  semiotic  resources,
analysis of interactional processes must be sensitive to the social affordances of the specific medium being analyzed,
yet also be applicable across multiple media in order to facilitate dialog between researchers. This introduces a pair
of related challenges to the creation of a generalizable method: it must be media agnostic but simultaneously media
aware. A workable method needs to be independent of the form of the data under analysis. At the same time, the
method needs to maintain a record of how people make use of the specific affordances of media. This is required to
allow analysis to speak to design and empirically drive the creation of new, more effective media.

          Much of the foundational work in sequential analysis of interaction has focused on face-to-face interaction.
Production blocking and the ephemerality of spoken interactions constrain communication in such a manner that
turns (Sacks et al., 1974) and adjacency pairs (Schegloff & Sacks, 1973) are appropriate units of analysis for face-to-
face data. These units of analysis are not as appropriate for CMC since most online media support simultaneous
production   and   persistence    of contributions.   Contributions     may    become    available  to   other  participants     in
unpredictable orders, may not be immediately available, and may address earlier contributions at any time (Garcia &
Jacobs, 1999; Herring, 1999). Because conceptual coherence can be decoupled from temporal or spatial adjacency,
we  cannot  restrict analysis  to the relationships   between  adjacent    events. Nor   is it appropriate   to treat CMC     as a
degenerate form of face-to-face interaction (e.g., by seeking an analog to adjacency pairs) since people use attributes
of new media to create new forms of interaction (Dwyer & Suthers, 2006; Herring, 1999).

          Based on considerations discussed in this section, we sought an analytic approach that (1) maintains the
sequential  and  situational  context  of  activity so that an  account    of  the interactional  construction   of   meaning    is
possible, (2) does    not assume     that the medium   of   interaction  has   any  particular  interactional   properties  (e.g.,
synchronicity,   availability  of contributions,   or  persistence), but   (3) records   these  properties   where    they exist.
Additionally,  it should   (4)   be  sufficiently formalized   to  enable  computational     support   for  analysis,    including
sequential and statistical analysis, and (5) capture aspects of interaction that are critical to learning. The analytic
framework we developed draws on other interaction analysis methods, but it uses generalized concepts of interaction
elements and structures that are independent of any particular medium. The remainder of the paper describes the
theoretical foundations for our analytic representation, and how it is constructed and used.

Theoretical Foundations
          We need a unit of interaction that abstracts from media-specific concepts such as adjacency, is applicable to
the wide variety of temporal, spatial and notational properties of media, and is capable of tracing the entwinement of
individual and intersubjective trajectories of meaning-making. Since collaborative learning is only possible when
something is shared and transformed between participants, we built this unit of analysis on the concept of uptake
(Suthers,  2006a).   Uptake   is  how  we   describe  the  act of  a participant   taking   reifications  of prior    or ongoing
participation (e.g., expressions of information, attitudes and attentional orientation; whether ephemeral or persistent)
as having certain relevance for further participation. Uptake is a transitive act, in that it always is oriented towards
the taken-up  as  its  object, which   is  foregrounded    by  the act  as being   relevant.   Uptake  is  interpretative: some
particular aspect of the object is brought forth and given (further) meaning. The "thematic connections" of Resnick,
Salmon,   Zeitz,  Wathen,  &     Holowchak    (1993)   are an  example     of uptake,  although   our  conception     allows  for
nonlinguistic forms of expression, and for other kinds of interpretative acts in addition to argumentative ones. A
participant can   take up one's   own   prior reifications as  well  as those  of  others:  by  identifying  both, analysts   can
characterize  visible  trajectories  of   intrasubjective  and  intersubjective    meaning-making.     Uptake    is   a  form    of
participation: the act must be visible within a given realm of participation to be uptake in that realm. An individual
working through ideas via mental processes and external notations has access to his or her uptake across as well as
within these media, but in the social realm only visible acts can foreground and interpret prior reifications.

          Our framework for uptake analysis tries to be useful to multiple theoretical and analytic paradigms, but is
based on two theoretical assumptions about the nature of artifact-mediated collaborative interaction.
·   Coordination: Efforts to coordinate between the personal and social realms are enacted through media
    (including expressions and perceptions).
·   Ongoing sequential structure: The sequential structure of these coordinations at successively overlapping and
    expansive granularities is significant in understanding how meaning-making is accomplished.

                                                               696                                                       CSCL 2007
All interaction  is mediated  by  physical    and   cultural tools  (Wertsch,  1998),  whether  in ephemeral    media  such  as
thought, speech and gesture, or persistent media such as writing, diagrams, or electronic representations. Distributed
cognition  (Hutchins,   1995)    describes    how   information    is transformed   as  it propagates  via   coordinations   of
representations through a distributed socio-technical system. According to Hutchins, the coordinated representations
include individuals' internal conceptions in addition to external, perceptible representations. We draw on the idea of
coordination, noting that coordination between personal and social realms can be accepted regardless of whether one
accepts  the existence  of cognitive     representations. A  typical  distributed  cognition analysis starts  by identifying a
system's function (e.g., steering a ship) and involves tracing the propagation of information through the system and
identifying  transformations     that take    place at  points   of   coordination  between   the  participants  and   external
representations. In  settings   fundamentally      concerned   with   the creation  of  new  knowledge,    this  focus on   the
enactment of functional relationships implies too static an interaction structure, and indeed takes as a starting point
that which analysis seeks to uncover. An analysis based on uptake, in contrast, starts with the identification of acts
of  coordination and  the  dependencies     between    them,  and   seeks  to recognize    what is accomplished   through  the
interaction. In doing so, we draw on the ethnomethodological idea that the meanings of actions are indexical (deeply
tied to the time and place of their enactment), and the consequence that the sequential structure of activity is of
fundamental importance (Garfinkel, 1967; Koschmann et al., 2004).

         Motivated    by    the   need      for  a  common       transcript
representation that exposes interactional structures in diverse forms
of mediated interaction, and for a formal structure that is amenable
to computation, we developed the dependency graph. A schema for
the basic analytical elements is shown in Figure 1. Any empirical
analysis must be built upon observable events. We assume that an
analyst is interested in deliberate acts, not just any physical event.
Therefore  the  analyst will  examine     the ongoing   stream   of   events        Figure 1. Schema for a dependency
and identify   those that  appear     to be coordinations    between    the
personal and public realms. These media coordinations are exemplified by mc1 and mc2 in Figure 1. The existence
of conceptions   is implied  by  media    coordinations,  but  we   need  not (yet) identify these  conceptions  (see  Suthers,
Dwyer et al., 2007 for further discussion of implied conceptions). The analyst need only make a commitment that
certain coordinations are of interest.

         If a media coordination mc2 is to be understood as taking up the contribution of a prior coordination mc1,
then there must be some observable relationship between the media coordinations. Therefore, we further ground the
uptake analysis in empirical evidence by identifying dependencies between media coordinations that suggest that
there is uptake. Dependencies     can    be found   in media-level,   representational, and  semantic  relationships  between
media  coordinations:   these will    be  discussed  below.   The   dependency    graph representation  takes   the form  of a
directed acyclic graph consisting of media coordinations and the dependencies between them (see Suthers, 2006a for
a formal definition) on which we may layer analytic interpretations. Dependencies provide evidence that uptake may
exist, but not all dependencies as defined at the media level need be uptake. The distinction between dependencies
and uptake is made because dependencies reflect the myriad of ways in which human action is deeply embedded in
and sensitive to the environment and immediate history of interaction, while only some of these relationships enter
into the realm of meaning in which participants are demonstrably oriented towards reifications as having relevance
for ongoing participation. Once these relationships have been identified, the graph defined by reversing the arcs may
be properly called an uptake graph, as in (Suthers, 2006a).

         Although we have described uptake as something that participants do, uptake is more accurately understood
as an etic abstraction that we as analysts use to identify interactionally significant relationships between acts. From
an emic perspective, participants don't engage in the abstract act of uptake; they engage in specific acts that they
affirm (through subsequent activity) as the accomplishment of recognizable activity (Garfinkel, 1967). The analyst's
identification of uptake is a bridge between empirical dependencies and further analysis. Uptake analysis is a proto-
analytic method that must be completed by further analysis motivated by a given research program. The dependency
graph provides resources for this further analysis by offering potential instances of uptake and grounding analysis in
empirical  media    coordinations.    This  representation   can   support   multiple methods   of  analysis, is amenable    to
computational support and visualization, and is meant as a boundary object for discussion and collaboration across
different analytical traditions.

                                                               697                                                   CSCL 2007
Uptake Analysis
          This   section describes    the practical tasks  involved      in producing    and  interpreting  a  dependency     graph,
accompanied     by  a discussion    of related  issues and   concrete    examples    from    our analysis  work.   In  practice,  the
process may iterate between identification of media coordinations, dependencies, and uptake; and may be driven by
specific analytic goals or may be more exploratory in nature.

Identifying Media Coordinations
          A   dependency    graph   is built   on  observed    media   coordinations     for which   conceptual    or  interactional
significance is claimed. Media coordinations are a more general form of elements from other analytical methods.
Content analysis methods that work with text highlight and code elements in the text record. Conversation analysis
and video-based     micro-analysis    identify  points of interest  in   the media   recording   or  transcript, and  the  media    or
transcript may be similarly coded or annotated. The analyst's identifications of media coordinations fulfill the same
function   as these  annotations.   Media  coordinations   are  represented      as vertices in  the dependency     graph.  We   call
these vertices fixed points since they constitute the points of departure for analysis. Fixed points are anchored in
media coordinations that can vary in granularity from a single instant to a period of time. The fixed point's anchor
should be specific enough to allow the analyst to return to the media action as accounted in the data record. As in
most interaction analysis methods, the source data is always the final authority.

          Some media coordinations are easy to identify. When analyzing spoken conversation or CMC, utterances
and messages are obvious candidates for media coordinations. The creation of an object in a shared workspace is
similarly  easy   to  identify  as  a  media    coordination.  We    use    the  general  term   expressions   to   refer  to media
coordinations of this nature. Other media coordinations are less obvious. For example, if two items are placed near
each other in a workspace this may be an expression of relatedness (Dwyer & Suthers, 2006). This illustrates the
more general issue of not confusing the representational vocabulary of a medium with the actions supported by the
medium. For example, a medium that supports spatial positioning may be used to create groups even if no explicit
grouping tool is provided.

          Perceptions    (e.g., hearing   or reading   another's   expression)      are another   form  of  coordination   between
representation    and conception.   Explicit   identification  of  perception    is absent from   many  other    analysis  methods,
which   implicitly   assume  that   each  participant  perceives   every     contribution,   and  does  so  at the   time  that  it is
produced   or  displayed.   With    asynchronous    data  this assumption     is  clearly  untenable.   The   applicability   of this
assumption    to  synchronous    interaction   can  also  be  questioned.    Therefore    our  abstract transcript   representation
allows for explicit specification of evidence for perceptions as another form of media coordination. It is difficult to
identify the conception that results from a perception, but it is sufficient to assume that some conception results and
mark   the perception    event  as  a media  coordination.    Researchers    interested   only   in public  behavior   need   not   go
further than   to use  the  perceptual  media   coordination    to  narrow    the   temporal  scope  of uptake    of  the perceived
contribution.   Researchers     interested in   psychological     (e.g., cognitive)     claims   about  individual   learning    may
subsequently attempt to infer the conception based on other evidence, including dependency relations. In either case,
the observed evidence for perceptual coordinations has been made explicit.

          A   fixed   point is  incomplete   without   a  description    of   the   evidence   on   which  the   analyst   based    its
identification.  The  practice   of making   evidence    explicit  addresses     several  issues. It limits the   degree   to which
analysts   can  make   assumptions     about   media   coordinations.    For  example,    maintaining   the    distinction between
expression    and perception    has forced   us to question    our assumptions      about  which    contributions  are available    to
others. Specifying the evidence distinguishes the descriptive "what" of the interaction from the explanatory "why"
of the  analyst's interpretation,   making   clear the specific   details   that were   seen as  significant.  This  helps multiple
analysts collaboratively review their observations and interpretations and facilitates trans-disciplinary discussions.

Identifying Dependencies
          The second task in constructing a dependency graph is to identify and document the dependencies between
media coordinations. A dependency represents a grounded assertion that the media coordination identified by one
fixed point enables the media coordination identified by another fixed point. Dependencies map out the sequential
unfolding of the interaction. They are defined in terms of a set of participating media coordinations and grounded
evidence for their interdependencies.

                                                                698                                                        CSCL 2007
    Figure 2. Comparison of threaded discussion reply structure (inset) and dependency graph (main graph) from
      an online discussion. Fixed points without letters are evidenced by message postings and with letters are
            evidenced by message reads. Dashed lines represent dependencies for intrasubjective uptake.
          Two  or  more    media    coordinations   can participate   in a   dependency     relationship.    Dependencies    are
directional and point backwards in time. A dependency expresses how a single media coordination depends on one
or more prior media coordinations. If multiple coordinations are dependent on a single coordination, then multiple
dependencies   are specified.   If mc2  depends  on   mc1 then   we  are claiming    that  mc1 enabled    mc2, but there  is no
assertion that mc1   caused  mc2.   In  our work    we  have frequently     had  to  work  with  the ambiguity    of  "potential
dependencies". Dependencies are a generalization of relationship types from other sequential data analysis methods,
such as "adjacency pairs," "reply," "thematic connections," etc., and are candidate uptakes. Specifying the evidence
for the dependencies    serves  the  same   purpose  as for  the fixed  points.   In particular, explicit  examination    of the
evidence makes it easier to distinguish the assertion of the dependency from its interpretation. In contrast, in many
coding  methods    the analyst  simply   asserts an  interpretation,  e.g., that  a  contribution is   an "elaboration"   on  or
"objection" to  another,   and  the validity  of this  interpretation is established    through   computations    of  inter-rater
reliability that do not make the evidence explicit. With dependencies, the evidence must support the assertion that
one or more media coordinations played a role in enabling another media coordination. Some types of evidence are
more easily identified than others. We have used three types of evidence for dependencies in our work. Starting with
the most concrete they are media dependencies, representational association, and semantic relatedness. These are
discussed below along with examples.

          The most concrete evidence is in the form of media dependencies--one action on the representation could
not have  taken place   in the  absence  of a previous  action.   A  reply  in  a threaded  discussion  depends    on the prior
existence of the message being replied to, and modifying an element of a shared workspace depends on the previous
act of creating the element. However, care must be taken not to fall into the trap of conflating the representational
vocabulary  with   the steps  in   the interaction. Consider  a   reply  in a   threaded   discussion. The   reply message    is
dependent on the message being replied to, but in terms of dependencies between coordinations it is more accurate
to say that the creation of the reply message is dependent on the author's perception of the message being replied to.
Figure 2 (adapted from Suthers, Dwyer et al., 2007) contrasts the reply structure of a short discussion (inset figure)
with the  dependency   structure   (including perceptions)   from   which   we   inferred  uptake (main   figure). Nodes   with
letters such as 8a, 7b, etc. represent media coordinations evidenced by message read events. When these perception-
related media  coordinations    are included, a  much   different pattern   emerges.    In particular, participant 3's  posting
(fixed point 2) is not only related to the single message being replied to, but is the result of a series of reads that
encompasses two subthreads of the discussion.

          The  second    type   of   dependency     evidence   is  representational     association.    The    use   of  similar
representational attributes is often used to indicate relatedness (Dwyer & Suthers, 2006). The representations can
have similar visual attributes (e.g., color or type face) or they can be grouped together or aligned spatially. Temporal
proximity  can  also   indicate relatedness--expressions    that  follow    each  other closely  are   often part  of the same
exchange. Each of these indications of relatedness can imply a dependency. In Figure 2, temporal proximity is part

                                                             699                                                      CSCL 2007
      Figure 3. Dependency graph of a dyad collaborating asynchronously with multiple media. Participant 1's
       coordinations are above and Participant 2's coordinations are below the timeline. Vertical bars represent
       workspace synchronizations in which the partner's recent work became available. Rectangles, octagons,
       and ellipses represent coordinations with an evidence map, a threaded discussion, and a word processing
       tool, respectively. The graph is partial and was constructed by identifying dependencies backwards from
                                        the portions of the essays shown.

of our evidence for the dependency of 2 on 7b, 5b, 6b, 4b, and 3a. In Figure 3 (an analysis of collaboration through a
shared workspace to be discussed below), spatial connectivity is our evidence for the dependency of perception 20a
on 19. Representational association can also consist of repeated words and phrases indicating a dependency on the
media coordination in which they were introduced. This can sometimes be easy to identify, for example when copy
and paste is observed, or a phrase is typed soon after reading it. However, in general it may be more difficult to
identify the original source of any content or to determine whether or not its re-use is actually dependent on the prior
use.

        The final type of evidence is semantic relatedness: the semantic content of a media coordination can be
traced to the semantic content of another media coordination. See for example the dependency of 7 on 20a in Figure
3. Semantic dependency can be difficult to identify and is often open to debate. For example, in one case we looked
at, one participant added three related nodes to an evidence map. The other participant, after reading them, added a
fourth node that seemed  to  summarize the  first  three. In general, representational and  semantic  dependencies  are
more  convincing if convergent evidence exists (e.g., temporal   proximity and semantic relatedness).

Documenting other media elements
        A dependency graph is a partial transcription of an interaction. It may be necessary to record additional
information to contextualize the interaction. This additional information can annotate or augment the dependency
graph  formalism.  For  example,  the  reply structure    of   a threaded   discussion is   an important  resource  for
understanding the participants' view of the medium, and so is included in Figure 2. In (Suthers, Vatrapu, Medina,
Joseph, & Dwyer, 2007), we used an asynchronous protocol. In order to identify which representational elements
each participant had available at any point  in time,  we  incorporated   indications  of workspace   updates by which
participants received new data from their partner, visualized as vertical bars in Figure 3.

Iteration
        Production   of the dependency graph    is an iterative  process of densification:  multiple passes through the
data identify additional elements and provide new insights into the interaction. The formalism of the dependency

                                                           700                                                 CSCL 2007
graph provides support for this process. New fixed points and dependencies can be continually added to the graph.
This has  the following   ramifications.    The  graph  can    grow  in complexity     to reflect  a deepening    knowledge      of   the
data, but the graph can never be considered "complete," except with regard to particular representational elements
(e.g., it is possible to claim that every discussion posting has been recorded as a fixed point). Therefore, one must be
cautious about asserting that a practice or pattern never occurs. The quality of the analysis is proportional to the
richness of the data. In our work with threaded discussions for online courses we only have log entries for when a
message   was  created   and  when     a user  opened   a   message.  Other   media     coordinations    such  as  scrolling    are  not
logged. On the other hand, our experimental configuration provides a complete record of every mouse and keyboard
event, every action on the shared representation, and a video capture of the computer screen from each client. The
richness of the latter data has allowed us to examine interaction at a much finer grain. Nonetheless, the threaded
discussion  data  is sufficient for    coarser  grained  analysis.   Finally,  repeated    iterations may     identify  new     types  of
representational elements, media coordinatins, and dependencies. Our work has suggested two other constructions:
interactionally defined representational elements that do not correspond to any explicit representational notation, and
composite media coordinations in which two or more media events seem to share a conception.

Example of Discovery by Uptake Analysis
         Figure 3 presents a dependency graph of data from a study of collaborative argumentation with evidence
maps.  See   (Suthers,  Vatrapu   et   al., 2007)   in this  volume   for    details  of the study.   This    analysis    was   done   to
understand how two participants used media resources to converge on the conclusion that aluminum is probably not
the cause of a disease under consideration. (The relevant information had been distributed across participants in a
hidden  profile.)   See  (Suthers,  Medina,     Vatrapu,    &  Dwyer,     2007)    in  this volume    for  discussion     of    whether
convergence   is  achieved    by    information    sharing    alone  or   whether     interactional  "round    trips"   are   required.
Construction of the dependency graph allowed us to discover an interesting interactional pattern that goes beyond
simple round trips. The information that "aluminum is the third most abundant element" and that this contradicts
aluminum as a causal agent has been successfully shared in an evidence map (media coordinations 27, 27a, 20, 19
and  20a). From   an  information    sharing    perspective,   this sequence    is sufficient   to explain    the fact  that    both  the
participants mentioned the abundance of aluminum (the successfully shared information) in rejecting aluminum as a
disease factor. However, participants did another round trip for confirmation over 20 minutes later in the session (7-
7a-8-8a). By exposing this dual round trip structure, the uptake analysis enabled us to hypothesize an interactional
pattern in which information is first shared in one exchange, and then agreement on a joint interpretation of this
information   is  accomplished      in a    second  exchange.    The    analysis   also   helped   us    discover    that participants
accomplished     the second   confirmation     round   trip by  moving    to  a  different   interactional    medium,     the   threaded
discussion.
         We are often asked how long an analysis takes, and what tools we used. Time estimates that are predictive
of future  work   are  not yet  possible,    because   the  analyses  reported     in this  paper   took  place   concurrently     with
extensive  discussions    in  which    we   developed    the   theoretical   and   practical  basis   for  the    framework.     These
discussions  took   place over  many     months    with multiple    revisions  of  the   analyses.  Visualizations     of dependency
graphs were constructed using standard tools such as ExcelTM, VisioTM, and OmnigraffleTM. Software tools tailored
to this task will support more efficient analysis.

Discussion
         The  initial  motivation   for   developing    the dependency       graph   formalism   was  to  support    our     analysis  of
collaborative knowledge      construction    through    computer    media    (Suthers,   2006a).   As    this work     progressed,    we
removed    implicit  assumptions    about   synchronicity    and availability    of   contributions  from     the notation.     We   also
realized that we could use the dependency graph as a boundary object between our different analysis methods. We
used the  dependency     graph  both   to   create aggregate   statistics of  interactions   and   their relationship     to the media
(Suthers, Vatrapu et al., 2007), and to examine the sequential structure of interaction (Suthers, Dwyer et al., 2007).
The  graph  allowed   us  to  trace asynchronous     interaction    between  pairs   of  participants back    from   aspects    of their
essays that  we   wanted   to explain.    Our   most   recent  analysis of   the data    (Suthers,  Medina    et  al., 2007)    bridged
statistical and sequential approaches by algorithmically identifying instances of an interaction pattern we refer to as
a "round trip" and then applying statistical tests on their frequency across experimental conditions.

         There   are  multiple   benefits    to the  dependency      graph   as  a   transcript  notation.    First, the   notation    is
independent   of  the  interaction  medium      and  can    be applied    to face-to-face    and   online  interactions      as well   as
interactions that take  place  in   multiple  media.   The   use of  generic   media     coordinations   allows   the  inclusion    of a

                                                                 701                                                          CSCL 2007
whole  range  of  communicative      actions,  including    perceptions   and interactionally    constructed     representational
elements. The  concept     of dependency      extends    the concepts    of utterance     and  adjacency    pair  to online and
asynchronous  media    and  accounts   for cases   where    media   coordination  is  the result of  multiple,   previous media
coordinations. Second, the notation can be used to address the tradeoff between statistical aggregation and sequential
analysis described at the beginning of this paper. The dependency structure can be used to document and interpret
the sequential structure of the interaction and can also be coded or searched to provide data for statistical analyses.
Third, the dependency graph adapts to the density of the source data. High-fidelity data can be used to produce a
dense graph that can be subject to detailed analysis. On the other hand, sparse data will produce a sparse graph but
will still support limited analysis. Fourth, the graph data structure is open-ended--additional data can always be
added, although this does imply that skepticism about the completeness of the graph should be maintained. Fifth,
grounding in explicit media coordinations allows analysis of correlations between interaction patterns and the media
affordances  that shape  them.  Finally,   the formalism     of the  graph  structure  supports  building   tools to manage    its
complexity and is amenable to algorithmic analysis and data mining techniques.

        A   delimitation   of the framework       is that,  in  focusing  on  observed    interaction,  it  does  not  explicitly
acknowledge the cultural or historical situatedness of the participants, or address identity and community, except
where these constructs might be recorded in terms of prior interaction. Many theoretical and practical issues remain
to be worked  out.  A  pressing  task  is  to extend  the   dependency   graph   formalism    to better incorporate    composite
media  coordinations  and   the possible   ambiguity     of dependencies.   A complete     explication  of  these  two   items is
necessary to extend   the  potential algorithmic     support   provided  by  the dependency      graph  structure.   The greatest
practical need is to develop software tools to help construct and use the dependency graph. The need for improved
analysis tools is a recurring theme (Sanderson & Fisher, 1994), and the size and density of the potential data sets
exacerbates  this  need.   Elaborations    on  the   visual  representation   should    be   explored,  including    embedding
dependency   graphs  in a  CORDTRA-style       representation    (Hmelo-Silver,   2003)   to  relate interaction  to both media
and episodes of activity. An important aspect of evaluating this framework will be to determine how well it scales to
the types of interactions  and  media   that   are of most   interest,  including larger   groups    across longer   time scales.
Manual  identification  of media  coordinations      and dependencies    is time-consuming     at present,  but   with improved
automation it might be possible to generate dependency graphs for larger online communities over the course of
months or even years. Finally, the value of this framework in supporting multiple analytic traditions and producing
"boundary   objects" for  CSCL   research     can only   be realized  in collaboration    with other  laboratories   undertaking
analysis of collaborative interaction.

References
Beck, I. L. (1997). Questioning the Author: An Approach for Enhancing Student Engagement with Text. Delaware:
        International Reading Association.
Bronckart, J. P. (1995). Theories of action, speech, natural language, and discourse. In J. V. Wertsch, P. D. Rio & A.
        Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural Studies of Mind (pp. 75-91). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chi, M., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-Explanations: How Students Study and Use
        Examples in Learning to Solve Problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley
        (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition (pp. 127-149): American Psychological Association.
De Wever, B., Schellens, T., Valcke, M., & Van Keer, H. (2006). Content analysis schemes to analyze transcripts of
        online asynchronous discussion groups: A review. Computers & Education, 46(1), 6-28.
Doise, W.,  & Mugny,     G. (1984).   The  Social    Development     of the Intellect, International   Series  in  Experimental
        Scoial Pscychology (Vol. 10): Pergamon Press.
Dwyer, N., & Suthers, D. D. (2006). Consistent Practices in Artifact-Mediated Collaboration. International Journal
        of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(4), 481-511.
Engestrom, Y. (2001). Expansive Learning at Work: toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. Journal of
        Education and Work, 14(1).
Garcia, A. C., & Jacobs, J. B. (1999). The Eyes of the Beholder: Understanding the Turn-Taking System in Quasi-
        Synchronous Computer-Mediated Communication. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 32(4),
        337-367.
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Goodwin, C., & Heritage, J. (1990). Conversation Analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 283-307.
Herring, S. C. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 4(4).

                                                                702                                                    CSCL 2007
Hmelo-Silver,    C.   E. (2003).   Analyzing   collaborative  knowledge    construction:   Multiple   methods    for integrated
         understanding. Computers & Education, 41, 397-420.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, Massachusets: The MIT Press.
Jordan,  B., &   Henderson,     A.  (1995).  Interaction   analysis: Foundations    and  practice. Journal    of the  Learning
         Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Koschmann, T. (2002). Dewey's Contribution to the Foundations of CSCL Research. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer
         support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community: Proceedings of CSCL 2002 (pp.
         17-22). Boulder, CO: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Koschmann,      T., Zemel,  A.,  &  Stahl, G. (2004).  The  video    analyst's manifesto  (or the implications   of  garfinkel's
         policies   for  studying   practice within  design-based    research). In  Y. Kafai,  N.  Sandoval,  N.    Enyedy, A.
         Nixon & F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp.
         278-385). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Olson,  G.   M., Herbsleb,    J. D.,  &  Rueter,   H. H.   (1994). Characterizing    the  sequential  structure  of  interactive
         behaviors through statistical and grammatical techniques. Human-Computer Interaction, 9, 427-472.
Pea, R. (2006). Diver. Retrieved Nov. 26, 2006, from http://diver.stanford.edu
Resnick, L.  B.,    Salmon,  M., Zeitz,  C.  M., Wathen,   S.  H., &  Holowchak,    M.   (1993).  Reasoning   in conversation.
         Cognition and Instruction, 11(3&4), 347-364.
Roschelle,   J. (1992).  Learning    by  Collaborating:  Convergent    Conceptual   Change.    The Journal    of the  Learning
         Sciences, 2(3), 235-276.
Roschelle, J., & Teasley, S. D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In C.
         E. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 69-197). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. (2000). Methodological Issues in the Content Analysis of
         Computer Conference Transcripts. International Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A Simplest Systematics for the Organization of Turn-Taking for
         Conversation. Language, 50(4), 696-735.
Sanderson,   P.,    & Fisher,    C. (1994).   Exploratory   Sequential  Data     Analysis: Foundations.    Human-Computer
         Interaction, 9, 251-317.
Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. Semiotica, 8, 289-327.
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: computer support for collaborative knowledge building. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press.
Stahl, G., Koschmann,       T.,  &  Suthers,  D.  D.  (2006).  Computer-supported      collaborative  learning:  An   historical
         perspective.    In  R.  K.  Sawyer    (Ed.), Cambridge      handbook    of the   learning   sciences (pp.   409-426).
         Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Suthers,  D.    D.   (2006a).    A  qualitative   analysis  of  collaborative    knowledge    construction    through   shared
         representations. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning (RPTEL), 1(2), 1-28.
Suthers, D. D. (2006b). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning-making: A research agenda for CSCL.
         International Journal of Computers Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.
Suthers, D.  D.,    Dwyer,   N., Vatrapu,    R., &   Medina,   R.  (2007). An    abstract  transcript notation   for analyzing
         interactional construction of meaning in online learning. In Proceedings of the 40th Hawai`i International
         Conference      on  the System    Sciences   (HICSS-34),    January   3-6, 2007,  Waikoloa,   Hawai`i    (CD-ROM):
         Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE).
Suthers, D.     D.,  Medina,    R., Vatrapu,   R.,  &  Dwyer,     N.  (2007).   Information   Sharing  is Incongruous     with
         Collaborative Convergence: The Case for Interaction. In Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2007
         (this volume).
Suthers, D.  D.,    Vatrapu, R.,   Medina,   R., Joseph, S.,  & Dwyer,   N.    (2007). Conceptual     representations enhance
         knowledge      construction  in asynchronous    collaboration. In     Computer  Supported    Collaborative   Learning
         2007 (this volume).
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as Action. New York: Oxford University Press.
Woods, D. (2006). Transana. Retrieved Nov. 26, 2006, from http://www.transana.org

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under CAREER award 0093505.

                                                               703                                                    CSCL 2007
