Information Sharing is Incongruous with Collaborative Convergence:
                                          The Case for Interaction

                              Daniel Suthers, Richard Medina, Ravi Vatrapu, Nathan Dwyer
                                     Laboratory for Interactive Learning Technologies
                     Dept. of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Hawai`i at Manoa
                                         collaborative-representations@hawaii.edu

          Abstract: Various authors have placed information sharing at the core of successful collaborative
          problem solving and learning. In this paper we report analyses of an experimental study that bring
          the sufficiency  of  an information    sharing   account   of collaboration    into question.  One   treatment
          group achieved greater convergence and integration of information in their handling of a complex
          problem, yet this same group shared less information in a hidden profile design. The pattern of
          convergence is more closely mirrored by interactivity quantified as the number of "round trips"
          addressing the same information items.

Introduction
          A central tenet of much research on group problem solving and learning in CSCL and related fields is that
information sharing is the primary operative mechanism of effective group performance. For example, contribution
theory (Clark    & Brennan,    1991)   postulates  processes   by   which   interlocutors   verify that  they  have   successfully
shared information.    A productive    research   strategy  in  social  psychology     involves   the  "hidden  profile"  (Stasser,
1992) in which information is distributed across participants and then group processes are tracked and evaluated in
terms of how this information is shared. Common findings include the failure to share information and the failure to
use information effectively once it has been shared (Dennis, 1996). In CSCL, Pfister (2005) tells us that "going from
unshared  to   shared  information  is  the gist of   cooperative   learning,"    yet Fischer and   Mandl    (2005)  find that  the
relationship between information sharing during collaboration and individual learning outcomes is not correlative.
Their  results suggest   that  information    sharing  does not  sufficiently     explain   outcome   measures  of  convergence,
although  differences   were   seen  between    factual and    "application  oriented"    information.   The  present    paper  also
questions the adequacy of information sharing as the basis for understanding collaborative outcomes.

          The  analyses  presented   in  this paper   were  motivated   by  an    interesting combination    of empirical    results
obtained in an experimental study that was based on the hidden profile paradigm (Suthers, Vatrapu, Medina, Joseph,
& Dwyer, 2007). Pairs in one treatment condition performed better on outcomes measures related to collaborative
knowledge construction: integration of multiple sources of information and convergence on similar solutions. From
this, one would expect that the pairs in this treatment condition also shared more information. Problematically, the
treatment   conditions  did   not differ  in    information   sharing   as evidenced     by   the information   that  participants
referenced in their essays, nor on their memory for facts one week later. Those measures of information sharing
were  based    on  the products   of  the   experimental    sessions   (essays    and  a  post-test):  more  direct  measures    of
information    sharing were    needed.   In the  follow-up     study summarized       in the  present  paper,  we   measured    the
information sharing that took place in the sessions themselves by tracing information that was given to only one or
the other participant at the outset. Surprisingly, we found that pairs in the higher performing condition shared less
information   in the  session: a  serious challenge    to  the information-sharing     explanation    of group  performance.    An
alternative explanation    was   needed,    for which   we  turned   to  interaction.    In information   sharing,  a  participant
expresses something in some medium and another participant accesses this expression. The smallest interactional
extension of this basic act is a "round trip" of uptake: the second participant takes up that which was expressed by
the first participant   by  forming    a  new,   related   expression,   which    then   is accessed   by  the  first  participant.
Accordingly,   we  measured    interaction  in  terms   of these round     trips. By  this  measure,   participants in   the higher
performing    treatment  condition   (which     shared less information)    interacted    more    than participants   in the   other
conditions.   The  incongruence    of  the  distribution   of  information   sharing     together  with  the congruence      of the
distribution of round trips suggests that it is worth examining the practices by which participants integrate multiple
sources of information and converge on common solutions. This paragraph has outlined the entire argument of the
paper. Below we summarize the key analyses before concluding with a brief discussion.

                                                                714                                                      CSCL 2007
Prior Results on Convergence and Integration
          The present paper is concerned with how well information sharing and
interaction account for a pattern of results found in a prior study, rather than
with the specific question addressed by that study. See the companion paper in
this volume (Suthers, Vatrapu et al., 2007) for details. The primary result of
interest is that pairs in the Graph condition were more likely to converge on the
same conclusion than pairs in the other conditions (2(2, N=30)=7.5, p=0.025):
see   Figure  1.   This    suggested    that  Graph    users    may   have      shared   more
information, but analysis of essay contents did not back up this interpretation:
participants  in all  conditions   were   equally   likely  to  cite information     that was
originally   given   to their   partner. Also,   Graph    users  performed      significantly
better  than Mixed      users on   the  "high integration"     questions     of the  post-test        Figure 1. Pair agreement
(F(2,57)=4.40,    p=0.0167),      suggesting   that they    were     able to    more   effectively bring   relevant and  distributed
information   together.    However,     comparison     of  participants'   performance     on  memory    for information  that they
received versus memory for information given to their partners yielded no significant difference, again suggesting
that information sharing was not the operative mechanism.

The Information Sharing Analysis
          The  essays    and  post-test   are only  indirect    measures     of information
sharing.   We    undertook      an   analysis  to   test   the  possibility     that   Graph
participants   achieved       integration    and    convergence       by     sharing     more
information during the session. This analysis was based on tracing information
distributed  according     to a   hidden  profile  in  materials     given   to participants
(Suthers, Vatrapu et al., 2007). An information sharing event consists of the
sequence in which (1) Pa (participant A) perceives information that had been
given   uniquely  to  him    or her, (2)  Pa  expresses    that information     in   a shared
workspace,    and    (3)   Pb (participant    B)  perceives     that expression      (objects
required a specific action in order to be read). The total number of such events
was   summed     for  each   pair  (the  dyad  is the  unit  of  all  analyses).     The  401      Figure 2. Information sharing
information   units   that were   uniquely    provided   to only one   participant     define
the total number     of  information     sharing  events   possible   under     this analysis. Results (Figure 2)   show that  more
expressions (2) of the information units and more perceptions (3) of these expressed information units were made in
the Text condition compared to Mixed and Graph conditions. A one-way ANOVA of perceptions of information
units  indicates  that  this  data would   be  highly  unlikely   if  there   were    no  differences on information  sharing  (F(2,
27)=13.54, p<0.0001). The difference between Text and Graph falls within a Bonferroni 95% confidence interval.
From    this analysis,    information    sharing   cannot    account   for   the     convergence   and integration  outcomes.    The
distributions in Figure 1 and Figure 2 are completely different. It would have been problematic enough if there were
no differences between groups, but the result that the Graph users actually shared fewer information items than Text
users completely invalidates an information sharing account.

The Round Trip Analysis
          Process     analyses    in  the prior   study     showed     that     Graph    users
elaborated on hypotheses significantly more than Text users (Suthers, Vatrapu
et al., 2007). Although these analyses counted individual acts in isolation, the
results  suggest     that  Graph     participants   are     achieving     integration     and
convergence through continued interaction around previously expressed ideas.
"Interaction" is potentially a complex idea: it includes the basic act that we are
calling "information     sharing"    and  extends   to diverse   forms    of discourse.   To
conduct a quantitative analysis we need to identify the simplest possible unit of
interaction  that  is   distinguishable   from   information    sharing.     Given   that we
have   defined   information      sharing  as    including   (2)  the   expression      by  a
participant Pa of an idea related to a topic that is (3) perceived by Pb, the next                     Figure 3. Round trips
interactive step that can be taken beyond information sharing is for (4) Pb to
express a related idea that is then (5) perceived by Pa. In this "round trip," intersubjectivity forms: Pa has expressed
and seen   his or  her   expression    interpreted  by   Pb. In  order    to place   this analysis on  the same foundation    as the

                                                                  715                                                      CSCL 2007
information sharing analysis, we decided to include only round trips that involved an information item that was (1)
uniquely   given to   Pa. The  results  (Figure 3) showed     that more   round trips were   made  in the   Graph condition
compared to Mixed and Text conditions, following the pattern of Figure 1. A one-way ANOVA on number of round
trips suggests   that  these   results are not  likely if the groups   were  equivalent   on  interactivity (F(2, 27)=3.03,
p=0.0648), but pairwise differences did not fall within a Bonferroni 90% confidence interval. This study was limited
to tracing round trips addressing factual knowledge: further work could trace the development of hypotheses.

Discussion
         This work does not take a stance on whether convergence is desirable. Rather, the point is that a difference
in convergence and integration was observed that cannot be accounted for by information sharing, but the simple
addition of a reply changes the picture entirely. Although the last test reported does not meet the traditional cutoff of
0.05, following Gigerenzer (2004) we view probabilities as properties of the data to be reasoned about in context,
rather than as input to a mechanical decision procedure. The combination of results--more elaboration in the graph
condition, a pattern of round trips that is unlikely yet congruent with the pattern of convergence we seek to explain,
and an incongruent pattern of information sharing--rules out information sharing as an adequate explanation and is
sufficient to suggest     that interaction  is worthy   of  further study  as   the basis for knowledge     integration  and
convergence in collaborative learning. Currently, much empirical work in CSCL (as well as some of its sister fields)
remains focused on information sharing, while we lack an equally comprehensive research program on whether and
how interaction adds value for collaborative learning beyond information sharing. The strategy taken by this paper
as a contribution to the ongoing methodological and theoretical dialogues within CSCL is to demonstrate that it may
be profitable  for  those   working    in  an  experimental paradigm    to examine    interaction in  order  to account  for
quantitative  results. Further,   we    advocate  alliances with    those  who  work   in  analytic  paradigms    that delve
systematically into interaction (e.g., Stahl, 2007; Suthers, Dwyer, Medina, & Vatrapu, 2007 in this volume). As a
topic of study, interaction has potential to unify our field by being the shared object of analysis between researchers
in multiple methodological traditions.

References

Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley
         (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition (pp. 127-149): American Psychological Association.
Dennis, A. R. (1996). Information exchange and use in group decision making: You can lead a group to information,
         but you can't make it think. MIS Quarterly, 20(4), 433-457.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2005). Knowledge Convergence in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: The
         Role of External Representation Tools Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(3), 405-441.
Gigerenzer, G. (2004). Mindless statistics The Journal of Socio-Economics, 33, 587-606.
Pfister, H.-R. (2005). How to support synchronous net-based learning discourses: Principles and perspectives. In R.
         Bromme, F. Hesse & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and Biases in Computer-Mediated Knowledge
         Communication--And How They May be Overcome. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Stahl, G. (2007). Meaning making in CSCL: Conditions and preconditions for cognitive processes by groups. In
         Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2007 (this volume).
Stasser, G. (1992). Information salience and the discovery of hidden profiles by decision-making groups: A "thought
         experiment". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 52(1), 156-181.
Suthers, D. D., Dwyer, N., Medina, R., & Vatrapu, R. (2007). A framework for eclectic analysis of collaborative
         interaction. In Proceedings of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2007 (this volume).
Suthers, D. D., Vatrapu, R., Medina, R., Joseph, S., & Dwyer, N. (2007). Conceptual representations enhance
         knowledge construction in asynchronous collaboration. In Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
         2007 (this volume).

Acknowledgments
         David Burger, Sam Joseph and Niels Pinkwart contributed to the design of the prior study on which this
study is based. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under CAREER award 0093505.

                                                              716                                                  CSCL 2007
