                          Using Learning Management Systems to
       Support Students' Collaborative Learning in Higher Education

Stephanie D. Teasley & Steven Lonn, University of Michigan, School of Information and Digital Media Commons,
                                       1075 Beal Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2112
                                     Email: steasley@umich.edu, slonn@umich.edu

         Abstract:    Learning   Management      Systems  (LMS)    are web-based     systems    for the distribution,
         management      and retrieval of  course  materials, and to  support     communication    between  students
         and   instructors.  A   LMS   can  also  support   peer collaboration    by providing     students with  the
         capacity to create their own project sites.    In this paper we present data from system logs, surveys,
         and interviews to investigate how one such system, CTools, is used by students at a large public
         university to facilitate peer learning.

Overview
            Technology-enabled      learning  is increasingly important     in today's higher   education   and   "courseware"
systems appear to be one of the most rapidly diffusing e-learning technologies (Dutton, Cheong, & Park, 2003).
Courseware    refers to  web-based   systems  that allow  instructors  and  students   access   to  instructional materials, to
make class    announcements,    and to submit,   track, and grade  student  assignments.     There are popular commercial
products such    as  WebCT    (www.webct.com)      and   Blackboard    (www.blackboard.com),        institutionally developed
products such    as  Angel   (Penn   State, http://ais.its.psu.edu/angel/), and   open   source    products such    as Moodle
(http://moodle.org) and Sakai (www.sakaiproject.org).       A recent report showed that over 90% of all universities and
colleges are using one or more courseware-type products for student and faculty use (Hawkins, Rudy, & Nicolich,
2005).   In this  paper  we  use  the  term  Learning   Management     System     (LMS)  instead    of courseware   or  Course
management System (CMS), because the system we study here is employed for learning purposes both inside and
outside the course setting.

            Early   adopters  of LMS    in  higher education   have  typically    come   to these  applications   because they
promise to make teaching more efficient.      LMS are also being adopted because they are a symbol of innovation and
thus create a competitive advantage in the education marketplace and provide opportunities for enabling institutional
innovations   in learning   and education   (Dutton,  Cheong,  &  Park, 2003).      Although most LMS are used for the
distribution,  management       and retrieval  of  course   materials,  these     systems   are   increasingly    incorporating
functionality that supports communication between students and instructors and among students.               Communication
tools within LMS provide the kinds of active online engagement preferred by today's generation of students (e.g.,
discussion  tools,  chat rooms,  wikis,  and  blogs)  and  provide  opportunities    for using  these   systems   according  to
constructivist approaches    to learning rather  than simple  transmission     of knowledge   models.    In a recent study of
WebCT and Blackboard use conducted at Williams, Brandeis, and Wesleyan, more students than faculty reported
that the use of these systems "improved learning" (Hanson & Robson, 2004).             On our campus, 74% of students felt
they learned more from courses when the LMS was used.          Our research agenda includes investigating the modes and
quality of learning afforded by our LMS.

            In this paper we investigate how students use the project site capability of our LMS, CTools, to support
working with their peers.    Students' perceived value of the LMS has led to a wide proliferation of student-initiated
project sites created specifically to support learning activities taking place outside of the classroom and outside of
the course website.   Students are creating project sites to support the activity of group projects required by courses
and for student-led study groups (coined "eProject" and "eTeam" by Dutton, Cheong, & Park, 2003).                   Providing
project space inside the LMS provides students with the convenience of having one integrated environment for both
course and project work, and is especially valuable when students find themselves in groups where the members are
rarely collocated outside of class time.     We   are interested in how  project   sites are  used  to  support   collaboration,
looking specifically to see how project sites may support peer learning beyond making group work more efficient.

            In this paper we use a variety of empirical methods to gain a systematic understanding of how project
sites are being used by students to support their own learning.       We begin by characterizing the use of CTools for
student projects using an analysis of log data from our system.     Second, we examine data from an annual web-based

                                                             717                                                     CSCL 2007
survey to see how the use of project tools affects students' perceptions about project work and their own learning.
Finally, we report on work in progress consisting of a survey of student project site users and in-depth case studies
to illustrate the types of students' project site use.

CTools Use on Campus
             Our university has offered a LMS for voluntary adoption by faculty since 1997.          The current version of
our system,  CTools,   is built on the  Sakai architecture   (see  www.sakaiproject.org).      Approximately 80% of our
faculty report using CTools and 98% of our students have had at least one class using CTools.            In the current term
(Fall 2006), there are over 3,800 course sites and over 17,000 individuals log in to the system one or more times on
an average day.  All faculty, students, and staff at our university can also create their own project sites in CTools and
subscribe any number of members to that site.     As our LMS has become part of the basic IT infrastructure for our
campus, the number of project sites has increased dramatically.       Figure 1 shows the growth in project site creation
for the first two months of the Fall 2005 and Fall 2006 terms.       For the Fall 2006 term, students initiated 1,110 new
project sites which is 64% of all project sites (n = 1,750) created between August 23 and November 16.

                                 Figure 1. Fall 2005 and Fall 2006 Project Site Creation

             In the CTools   environment,   both course    sites and  project sites appear  as  tabs   across the top  of the
browser window, but users see only the tabs for the specific course and project sites to which they are subscribed.
Faculty and  student   users are automatically  subscribed   to  course sites  by the registrar's  office, but   project sites
members are added by the site creator.    Project sites offer much of the same functionality as course sites; users can
make announcements, post to a shared calendar, contribute and edit resources, and participate in discussion boards,
chats, wikis and soon, blogs.   Prior research on project sites (Teasley, Rader, Morgaine, Angell, & Narvid, 2006) has
shown   that sites are used  primarily  for posting    materials  to resources (98%   of   all sites), but users  also   made
announcements (39% of sites), added events to the calendar (22% of sites), posted to a discussion (15% of sites) and
posted to chat (15% of sites).  Wikis and blogs were not yet available to users at the time of the previous analysis.

             In April, 2006,  we surveyed   all instructional faculty  at our  institution and  sampled    from  25%   of the
undergraduate and graduate student population.    The response rate was 19% from faculty (n = 1,360) and 27% from
students (n = 2,485).     Our   survey asked  general   questions  about  preferences, use,    and benefits   of information
technology in classes; as well as more specific questions about CTools features, usability, and open-ended questions
on improvements for CTools.      We included a number of questions from the 2005 ECAR Study of Students and
Information Technology (Caruso & Kvavik, 2005).           Although intended primarily to understand the course-related
activity within CTools, we did ask several questions about project site use.        Specifically, we asked respondents to
indicate their experience with project sites and to rate the overall value for three categories of use: research, student

                                                             718                                                    CSCL 2007
work, and administrative tasks.     Not surprisingly, we found that more faculty than students had experience using
project sites for research (25% vs. 10%) and administrative work (22% vs. 9%), although both types of users rated
the value   of these  two  kinds of site use highly  (83-90%     of all users   rated them  "valuable"   or   "very valuable").
Experience with project sites used for student work was similar for faculty (20%) and students (23%), and was also
rated equally highly by both groups.     Specifically, we found that 91% of faculty and 89% of students rated this kind
of use as valuable or very valuable.     This suggests that both the students who use the projects sites as well as the
faculty who have experience with how students are using them believe that the sites are adding value to students'
educational    experience.  A   review   of the names   of  student-initiated   project   sites created  in   the current   term
illustrates some  of  these uses: using  project  sites for  a course's  required     group projects   (e.g., in  a Mechanical
Engineering    class; "ME395Team3,"      "ME395sec6team4"),       science lab   groups   (e.g., "Lab   Group   2"),    and group
study sites (e.g., "History Honors Com," "EDUC 695 Lit Review").

         Log data from Fall 2006 shows that the student-initiated project sites had an average of 4 members per site
(mode), although sites ranged in size from 1-1008 members.          An examination of the tools on the sites showed that
97% of the sites have resources, 82% have announcements, 60% have chat, 59% have a threaded discussion, and
32%  have    a  wiki.  These  findings   suggest  that  while  most    students  may    be using   project  sites   to broadcast
information out to a large group (e.g. resources and announcements), many students may be using the interactive
capability of the sites (e.g. chat, discussion, wiki) to build collective knowledge and learn from one another.

Ongoing Research
             In March   2007, we    conducted   a student survey    of  project site  creators  (N=306,  31%     response  rate).
Preliminary results from this survey indicate that the majority (70%) of the project sites students used the most were
created for  course-related projects.  The  survey  results  also indicated   that  the LMS     tools students value    most for
collaboration   are  Resources,  Announcements,     and   Email   Archive.  The     majority   of survey   respondents     (53%)
participated in one or two project sites in Fall 2006, and 52% visited those sites a few times each week. Sixty-two
percent of   students  reported  that they  participated  in   a project  site  for  only  one  term,  and    17%   of  students
participated in project sites for more than one calendar year.
             Based on data from the event logs and surveys, we will select several project sites to study in depth by
interviewing the student users of these sites and examining the everyday use of their project sites.              By analyzing
interview, survey, and log data sources in concert, we plan to capture how students use project sites to shape the
nature of their self-directed collaborative learning experiences with peers.

Impact
             We believe that the findings from this research will help demonstrate how CTools and other LMS can be
used to support collaborative learning in higher education.      As these systems become ubiquitous in higher education,
it will be increasingly important to move the focus from faculty use to student use to determine how students can
leverage the capacities of these systems in service of their own learning.

References
Caruso, J. B., & Kvavik, R. B. (2005). ECAR study of students and information technology, 2005: Convenience,
         connection, control, and learning. Boulder, CO: Educause.
Dutton, W. H., Cheong, P. H., & Park, N. (2003). The social shaping of a virtual learning environment: The case of
         a university-wide course management system. The Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 2(1).
Hanson, P., & Robson, R. (2004). Evaluating course management technology: A pilot study. Boulder, CO:
         EDUCAUSE Center for Applied Research, Research Bulletin, Issue 24.
Hawkins, B. L., Rudy, J. A., & Nicolich, R. (2005). Educause core data service: Fiscal year 2004 summary report.
         Washington D.C.: Educause.
Teasley, S. D., Rader, E., Morgaine, W., Angell, N., & Narvid, J. (2006). Sakai project sites: Who uses them and
         why. Presentation at the Sakai Educational Partners Program Meeting, June 1, 2006, Vancouver, Canada.

                                                             719                                                       CSCL 2007
