   Supporting Collaborative Learning in Online Higher Education
                                    through Activity Awareness

     Chris Amelung, Yale University, 175 Whitney Ave., New Haven, CT 06512, chris.amelung@yale.edu
    James Laffey, Paul Turner, University of Missouri-Columbia, 303 Townsend Hall, Columbia, MO 65211,
                                       laffeyj@missouri.edu, turnerp@missouri.edu

         Abstract: Improving activity awareness, the ability to know what is going on around you in ways
         that are meaningful to your learning objectives and activities, in online learning has the potential
         to enhance the effectiveness of online learning for students and instructors. This paper introduces
         readers to the Context-aware Activity Notification System being developed for use within course
         management systems. [60]

Introduction
         Online learning is becoming a pervasive part of higher education. However, while online learning plays a
powerful role in broadening access within and beyond campus sites, there is a growing concern that it may be
diminishing the quality of teaching and learning by forcing instructors and learners to view courses through the
narrow pedagogical lens afforded by contemporary software systems. There is potential, however, for making the
pedagogical aspects of online courses rich, effective and efficient, but this potential depends on improving online
learning so it is active and social without making it more complex or technologically intrusive. Activity awareness,
while a difficult objective to achieve, has great potential for supporting more active and social online learning. This
paper briefly introduces the reader to the Context-aware Activity Notification System (CANS) being developed for
the Sakai community and potentially for use within other course management systems, and to the objectives of a
three-year project funded by the Fund for the Improvement of Post-Secondary Education (FIPSE).

The Need for Activity Awareness in Online Higher Education
         Students  learn   in a  variety  of  ways,  including  listening to lectures, writing papers,  reading    texts,
undertaking projects, and     discussing issues. Instruction provides explicit guidance  for  what  to do and   how  to
proceed. Given appropriate conditions and resources instructors can guide students to work individually or more
collaboratively on their   assignments.  Additionally  student  motivation and tacit knowledge   that  comes  from  the
instructional and social context also shape the "what to do and how to proceed" decisions that students make.

         Today's  approach    to online  learning is encapsulated  in course   management  systems    (CMS)   of which
Blackboard,  WebCT    and     Sakai represent  popular applications.  These  CMS  provide    fairly effective ways  for
instructors to give and control access to information about a course (syllabus, assignments, grades) and about the
subject matter (instructional resources). They also provide some facilities for direct interaction through discussion
boards and chat rooms, and in various other ways try to support forms of interaction. These approaches help manage
the course but are very limited in how they help teach the course or support learning. In many ways the CMS is a
black veil between the instructor and students and among the students.       Faculty and students are limited in their
knowledge about what is happening in the course to the "words" spoken. Students do not see other students working;
nor for the most part do they see each other's products. Instructors do not see students working and can only
influence them with words. The incidental learning that happens through working together, the social learning that
happens through observing others, and the motivation to keep learning that happens because of a sense a shared
social experience are greatly constrained. Instructors often impose artificial tasks such as requiring a number of
postings to a   discussion board    to force some   minimal  level of engagement.    Students quickly  "learn"  to only
complete tasks that are directly related to course assessments and all too rarely become engaged in dialogue to
enhance learning.

         Learning in CMS does not provide attributes and cues that normally help motivate and tacitly shape face-
to-face learning. Expert online instructors try to make up for these deficiencies with engaging tasks and emphasizing
the social and collaborative nature of learning, but in general CMS are deficient in many of the cues that are
important to motivation and for having activity help shape learning. By providing information about what others are
doing (who is online, what are they doing, etc.) and what is happening (what documents are being read, what

                                                            72                                                CSCL 2007
activities have been completed, etc.), we predict that collaborative learning can be better supported in online higher
education and will be viewed as substantially more effective, acceptable and sustainable for instructors and students.

INNOVATION
Awareness and Notification
        Information systems need to attend to the social nature of knowledge building in order to support the
accessing,   processing and  sharing  of information   (Brown  and  Duguid,    2000). Researchers   and  developers      of
knowledge building and sharing systems are finding that behavior in these systems is based on more than just the
information stores of the systems and the explicit messaging of other members. Behavior is also based on the
implicit messaging associated with behavior in these systems, such as being there, choosing actions, and ways of
interacting. Researchers   of   computer  supported  collaborative  environments   have    identified   tacit aspects    of
communication, such as awareness, co-presence, social navigation, and social proxies, as fundamental to computer-
mediated social interaction (Dourish, 2001, Erickson, et al., 2002, Fitzpatrick, et al., 1998). Harrison & Dourish
(1996) argue for using the computer (1) as a medium to represent the explicit and tacit information to be shared in a
social interaction, and (2) having forms of the medium that are appropriate and effective for the social practices of
the "place."  Dourish   argues  that computation  is a  medium   that communicates    between    social actors    and that
represents possibilities for action (participation in the world) (Dourish, 2001, Dourish, et al, 1996, Erickson, 1993,
Neale, et al., 1998).

        Dourish also stresses the notion of "accountability"   (making actions observable and reportable) because it
provides others with a means to understand and respond to the actions of others for mutually constructed sequences
of  action. Fitzpatrick et al. (2002) have  taken similar  notions of  accountability in  a social space  (locale)    as a
foundation for designing collaborative systems. They note that the integration of functionality to produce, gather and
redistribute information from everyday activities with facilities to make the information publicly available and easily
accessible   enables  computer-mediated  awareness   to support   the flow  of interaction  that happens   easily   when
participants are co-located.

Context-aware Activity Notification System
        Based on Strauss's Theory of Action and Vygotsky's Activity Theory, Fitzpatrick (1998) developed the
Locales Framework to explain mutual activity in an online environment. Amelung (2005) has extended the Locales
Framework by developing a Framework for Notification in online collaborative environments. The implementation
of the framework uses a distributed architecture and is called CANS (Context-aware Activity Notification System).
The CANS System includes the collaborative online system, such as a course management system, and the CANS
Server, which provides communication and database services for notification. CANS supports capturing activity
information  by establishing   a vocabulary of tools   and action  events, maintaining  a  history of   activity, making
notifications available based on the context of use, and allowing users to configure their notification preferences.

        CANS works by observing activity in the CMS, such as when a member logs in, reads a discussion board
item, uploads a document, or enters a chat message. The records of all these observations are stored in the CANS
database and matched with profiles for access to awareness information set by the members. Matches lead CANS to
send information to members who want the information in a form they have selected. For example, a student in a
group may want to know when the instructor has posted an assignment and have that information immediately
emailed or delivered via a desktop widget (a small application that can always be visible on one's desktop). The
student may want to see who has posted new messages or read existing messages, but only want that information
when they enter the CMS. An instructor may want the same information but want it organized in a table to see who
has contributed and how much to a discussion. Thus the awareness information is a resource for instructors and
students in knowing when and how to act, and also a tool for an instructor to quickly make sense of what is going on
in the course, how to assess what is going on, and identify appropriate next steps for the class or individual students.

CANS Development and Implementation
        Over the past 2 years we have developed CANS to work with Sakai. Sakai is a CMS with a community
source license that is rapidly emerging as a platform of choice in university environments. As well as being a
software system, Sakai is also a community of educators, researchers and developers who are envisioning how
software and information systems can substantially improve higher education teaching and learning experiences.
The Sakai community, http://sakaiproject.org, includes over 80 institutions of higher education (IHE).

                                                           73                                                   CSCL 2007
        CANS is licensed under the Educational Community License (1.0) version of the open-source license and
is designed to work with Sakai or any other network-based application capable of generating or receiving XML.
CANS is being used at the University of Missouri-Columbia in online courses and notifications are provided via
daily email digests that describe activity within a course context over the past 24 hours. New forms of digests are
being developed to show social comparisons and test the influence of various strategies to visualize the activity data.
The CANS Server and desktop widgets can be downloaded at http://www.cansaware.com.

        FIPSE has funded a three-year project to enhance and extend CANS, test its potential to improve online
teaching and learning, and examine the impact of providing more socially attuned course management systems on
the acceptance of online learning in higher education. In the first phase of development CANS will be enhanced so
as to provide online and customized management       of notifications by instructors and   students. This  ability for
customization along with new development to embed notifications within a notifier application on the home pages
of course sites will be tested for its impact on the social nature of learning and technology appropriation. Phase 2
will continue the development of phase 1 and add new tools for visualizing course activity as well as integrating
notification information into common Sakai tools, such as the discussion board and resources applications. Phase 2
will include testing the impact of notification on teaching practices and learning outcomes, and be undertaken with
partners at the University of Michigan and Virginia Tech. In addition the CANS team is eager to find more partners
who would like to try CANS and participate in collaborative research to test and extend the potential of activity
awareness to improve the social nature of online courses and augment efforts for collaborative learning.

References
Amelung, C. (2005). A Context-based Activity Notification Framework for Developers of Computer Supported
        Collaborative Environments. Unpublished dissertation. University of Missouri-Columbia.
Brown, J. & Duguid, P. (2000). The social life of information. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the action is: The foundations of embodied interaction. MA: MIT Press.
Dourish, P., Adler, A., Bellotti, V., & Henderson, A. (1996). Your place or mine? Learning from long-term use of
        audio-video communication. Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, 5(1), 33-62.
Erickson, T. (1993). From interface to interplace: The spatial environment as a medium for interaction. In
        Proceedings of Conference on Spatial Information Theory.
Erickson, T., Halverson, C., Kellogg, W. A., Laff, M. and Wolf, T. (2002). Social translucence: Designing social
        infrastructures that make collective activity visible. Communications of the ACM (Special issue on
        Community,   ed. J. Preece), 45(4), 40-44.
Fitzpatrick, G. (1998). The locales framework: Understanding and designing for cooperative work. PhD Thesis,
        Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering. The University of Queensland.
Fitzpatrick, G., Parsowith, S., Segall, B., and Kaplan, S. (1998). Tickertape: Awareness in a single line. CHI'98
        Summary, Los Angeles, CA, 281-282.
Harrison, S. and Dourish, P. (1996). Re-place-ing space: The roles of place and space in collaborative systems. In
        Mark S. Ackerman, ed., Proceedings of ACM 1996 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
        (pp. 67­76). Boston MA, Nov. ACM Press.
Neale, D. C., McGee, M. K., Amento, B. S., and Brooks, P. C. (1998). Making media spaces useful: Video support
        and telepresence (Tech. Report HCIL-98-01). Blacksburg, VA: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
        University, Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory from the World Wide Web:
        http://hci.ise.vt.edu/lab/HCI_Pubs.html

                                                          74                                                CSCL 2007
