           Boundary conditions for applying argumentative diagrams

Marije van Amelsvoort, Seger Breugelmans, Tilburg University, Warandelaan 2, P.O.Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg,
                    The Netherlands, email: m.a.a.vanamelsvoort@uvt.nl, s.m.breugelmans@uvt.nl

          Abstract:    In this  paper, we   examine   two   factors that   may  influence   the  use of diagrams   in
          computer-supported     collaborative  argumentation-based        learning: students'   preference  for and
          ability to construct and read argumentative diagrams as opposed to argumentative texts, and the
          complexity level of presented information. Fifty-two high school students and 74 undergraduates
          completed a questionnaire on preference for argumentative texts or diagrams with different levels
          of difficulty. The high school students were also asked to construct texts and diagrams. Results
          show that preference for textual or diagrammatic representation depends on the level of difficulty
          of the represented information. The results suggest that learning with argumentative diagrams is
          only perceived   to   be beneficial with  a medium       level of information    complexity.  Sub  optimal
          diagram construction in our previous studies on computer-supported collaborative learning may
          have been due to the complexity of the information.

Introduction
          Computer-supported collaborative argumentation-based learning is described as an activity in which two or
more    people construct    knowledge      by discussing    a   topic in    a  computer-environment.     People    learn  from
argumentative   interaction  because   it  involves reasoning   instead    of merely  retrieving  information   from  memory
(Andriessen, Baker & Suthers, 2003). They have to explicitate their thoughts, need to look at information from
different sides, and search for causes and relations in the topic under discussion.

          The broader and deeper learners' discussions, the more they can learn. However, good discussions do not
automatically  occur.   Most    people have   difficulties with argumentation,     especially with   looking at  a topic  from
different  perspectives,  and   countering   viewpoints    (Chan,  2001:   Felton  &  Kuhn,   2001).   One   reason  for  these
difficulties is that argumentation is not linear, and consequently, it is hard to get a good grip on the space of debate
through temporal linear discussion. Argumentative diagrams can be used to support argumentation-based learning.
An argumentative diagram displays arguments in boxes, and relations between these arguments in arrows. There are
various advantages to diagrams. For example, a diagram can represent the structure of the argument and the relations
between different viewpoints and arguments, or be the basis for further discussion. However, less is known about
the boundary conditions for applying diagrams. Students seem to not always exploit the benefits of argumentative
diagrams (e.g., Munneke, Van Amelsvoort & Andriessen, 2003). They are very apt at understanding how to create a
diagram, but they seem not to understand its possible added value of structure and relations for guiding discussions
and learning.

          We   wanted   to know    if  and  when  students   consider    argumentative  diagrams     useful for  learning. We
investigated two possible boundary conditions. First, we examined students' preference for and ability to work with
diagrams as opposed to text. Research into visual and verbal learning is not new (e.g., Sternberg & Zhang, 2001;
Mayer & Massa, 2003). However, two problems arise in applying these studies to argumentative diagrams. Firstly,
the term   `visual' is not accurate    for describing argumentative      diagrams,   since these kinds  of  diagrams  are  very
`texty'. Argumentative diagrams are both verbal and visual. To our knowledge, there is no questionnaire available
that investigates students' preference and ability for argumentative diagrams as opposed to plain argumentative text.
Therefore, we constructed one ourselves. Secondly, we believe that an important factor in students' preference and
ability is complexity     level of the  information   represented.  Students   may    not  consider  argumentative   diagrams
beneficial when the information is very complex, because this impairs structure and overview. Therefore, we also
investigated students' preference and ability while varying information complexity.

Study 1
Method
          Fifty-two  high  school   students  (23 boys     and 29   girls) participated in  the  study. They  were    asked to
complete a questionnaire before engaging in a discussion task with chat and diagram. The questionnaire consisted of

                                                               723                                                   CSCL 2007
two parts. The first part asked about preference for either texts or diagrams and consisted of seven questions. The
first question asked for students' general preference for information presented in text or diagram. In the other six
questions,  information   was presented     in  both  text   and diagram  (see  Figure  1), with     three different levels of
information complexity. Students were asked to choose the representation they preferred, and to indicate level of
difficulty of understanding the two representations on a 5-point Likertscale. The second part about ability consisted
of three assignments in which students were asked to construct a diagram from text or write a text from a diagram.

    I think   she is suited  for   this job.  She  had   the
    required education, has over five years of relevant
    work experience and has excellent communication
    skills. However,    recruiting her  is  very expensive
    because she has been working for a long time.

                      Figure 1. Example of a question (textual and diagrammatic representation).

Results
         Reliability of the questionnaire was good, Crohnbach's alpha ranging from .72 to .82 when distinguishing
between   the questions   on preference     and  complexity   level. The  interrater-reliability for  the  ability part of  the
questionnaire was .77 (Cohen's kappa).

         On   the first question,  64.7%    of the students   indicated a general preference     for verbal  information,  and
35.3% for diagrammatic information. A score on general preference for verbal information correlated highly with
perceiving the textual information as easier than the diagrammatic information. However, when the complexity level
was low or high, students tended to prefer textual information, while when the complexity level was medium, they
preferred diagrammatic information.

         Students' ability to construct texts from diagrams and diagrams from texts also related to the information
complexity. At the lowest level of information complexity, 51 out of 52 students scored the highest possible score.
At the highest level of information complexity, 4% scored low, 71% scored medium, and 21% scored high. There
was   no correlation between   preference    and   ability,  nor between  students'  score  on   the questionnaire   and   their
performance on the collaborative argumentation-based learning task.

Study 2
Method
         Seventy-four undergraduate psychology students were asked to complete the first part of the questionnaire
to investigate the question `Do preferences for textual or diagrammatic information change with complexity level?'
further. Part one was extended with two questions, to create four different complexity levels (easy ­ medium ­
complex ­ very complex).

Results
         When asked what representation students preferred in general, 72.6% chose verbal information, and 27.4%
chose graphical information. On the five-point Likertscales students indicated that textual information (M = 1.86, SD
=  .64)  was  easier  than   diagrammatic     information    (M  =  2.56, SD   =  .84). Level    of  perceived   difficulty of
understanding  ranged    from  1.16     to 2.27  for the textual   information,  and 2.24   to   3.73 for   the diagrammatic
information.

         Preference for textual or diagrammatic information was dependent on complexity level: while only 20.9%
of the  students  preferred  diagrammatic     over   textual information  when   information   was   at the  extreme   ends of
complexity-level   (easy  or very   complex),    55.5%   preferred   diagrammatic over   textual  information    when   it was
medium   or   complex.  Students   who     indicated a general   preference for  verbal information     preferred  the  textual
representation at the first and last two levels of difficulty, but the diagrammatic representation at the medium level
of difficulty. They always considered the textual representations to be easier than the diagrammatic representations.

                                                               724                                                   CSCL 2007
                                          Preference
Students who indicated a general preference for graphical information preferred the diagrammatic representation at
the medium and difficult level, but the textual representation at the extreme ends of difficulty-level. In addition, they
indicated diagrammatic information as easier than textual information only at the two middle levels of difficulty. In
short, we found a curvilinear relation between preference for verbal or visual information and complexity of the
represented information (see Figure 2)

                                                     0,6
                                                     0,5
                                                     0,4
                                                     0,3
                                                     0,2
                                                     0,1
                                                             1       2       3       4
                                                                 Complexity level

                 Figure 2. Preference for text (0) or diagram (1) related to complexity of information

Discussion
          Reading and constructing argumentative diagrams is not easy. Although an argumentative diagram can be
beneficial for collaborative argumentation-based learning, there are factors that can influence its beneficial effect. In
this paper, we investigated students' preference for and ability to read and construct argumentative diagrams with
different complexity   levels. In   general,         most  students prefer  textual  over   graphic  information. However,  the
complexity  of   information   that is  represented          influences  students'  preferences.  Argumentative   diagrams  are
preferred over text when the represented information is of medium complexity. We also found that students' have
more  difficulty  constructing  diagrams     from         text  when   the information   is complex.   Our  results  imply that
argumentative diagrams may only be useful for learning when the information (to be) represented is not too easy nor
too complex. A very simple diagram does not have added value over text, because there is no need to see structure
or relations. When a diagram is very complex, the benefits of showing structure and giving overview are not present
anymore. Our studies investigated students' individual ideas on mostly presented diagrams. Further research is now
needed to investigate whether this assertion stands when students construct diagrams in collaboration.

References
Andriessen, J., Baker, M., & Suthers, D. (2003). Argumentation, computer support, and the educational context of
          confronting cognitions.   In J. Andriessen,          M. Baker  &  D.  Suthers  (Eds.), Arguing to learn:  Confronting
          cognitions  in computer-supported              collaborative  learning  environments    (pp. 1-25). Dordrecht,   The
          Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Chan, C.   K.  K. (2001).  Peer  collaboration           and discourse  patterns  in   learning from incompatible   information.
          Instructional Science, 29, 433-479.
Felton, M., & Kuhn, D. (2001). The development of argumentative discourse skill. Discourse processes, 32, 135-
          153.
Mayer, R. E., & Massa, L. J. (2003). Three facets of visual and verbal learners: cognitive ability, cognitive style, and
          learning preference. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 833-846.
Munneke, L., van Amelsvoort, M., & Andriessen, J. (2003). The role of diagrams in collaborative argumentation-
          based learning. International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 113-131.
Suthers, D. (2001). Towards a systematic study of representational guidance for collaborative learning discourse.
          Journal of Universal Computer Science, 7, 254-277.
Sternberg, R. J., & Zhang, L. (Eds.). (2001). Perspectives on thinking, learning, and cognitive styles. Mahwah, NJ:
          Erlbaum.

                                                                   725                                                  CSCL 2007
