  Small-group Face-to-Face Discussions in the Classroom: A New
                                    Direction of CSCL Research
                  Wouter van Diggelen, Maarten Overdijk, Research Centre Learning in Interaction
                               Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 1, 3584CS Utrecht.
                                       w.vandiggelen@uu.nl, m.overdijk@uu.nl

       Abstract: This paper presents a relatively new direction of CSCL research: small-group learning
       in the classroom. This research direction has received relatively little attention within the CSCL
       community. In this paper we explore the possibilities of collaborative technology in the classroom.
       We     use the  distinction between  task-related and   social-emotional interactions as   a criterion for
       computer support. It is hypothesized that the students will use the collaborative technology purely
       for task-related interactions when the characteristics of the tool closely match the conditions for an
       effective task performance. It is assumed that these task-related interactions stimulate knowledge
       elaboration     and learning  within the    student group. Our    findings indicate that   all computer-
       mediated       interactions  were    task-related   and   facilitated  knowledge     elaboration.    Oral
       communication was about the social-emotional aspects of the collaboration, and the planning and
       regulation of the collaborative activities.

Introduction
       Small-group learning refers to the intelligent social practice of a group of students who work together on a
common    task. The   denomination   `intelligent' emphasizes  that  the  group has  the  ability to  alter their learning
activities in response to past experiences, new information or divergent perspectives. This ability cannot be traced
back solely to individual cognition but rather emerges from students' interactions. It is assumed that, under the right
conditions, students may benefit from their collaboration and will outperform students who learn alone. Small-group
learning as an instructional method demands a lot from the students. Students have to work together on a common
task, often without close guidance from the teacher. They have to deal with various problems, cognitive as well as
social in nature. It is assumed that use of computers may help the students to overcome some of these problems.
Computers could facilitate collaboration and learning within the group and it may support the students to achieve
their learning goals.

       A wide variety of computer applications has been developed to support small-group learning. These tools
stimulate specific cognitions and   behaviors that  are  expected to  be  beneficial for learning.  We  distinguish  three
small-group   learning situations  for computer    support  (Figure  1). Our  categorization is   based on    one type of
collaborative learning  practice:  problem-solving  discussions.  It underlines that  small-group   learning  is  generally
organized around a problem-solving task and that it takes its shape as a problem-solving discussion.

                   Figure 1. Three situations of computer support for small-group learning

                                                           726                                                   CSCL 2007
         The first situation (upper right corner of Figure 1) refers to the use of computers to connect students who
are dispersed in time and/or space. The majority of CSCL research focuses on this type of situation where all the
interactions are mediated by the technology. For many researchers, this represents the archetypal CSCL research
context. The other two situations of figure 1 have a fundamentally different orientation. They consider the existing
classroom context as taken for granted. These situations have two distinctive features:          1) students are in the same
room in close proximity and 2) they communicate face-to-face. The second situation (lower right corner of Figure 1)
represents  a situation  where    students    are co-located   and  work  with  a stand-alone   computer   application. These
applications typically model a problem situation that the students have to investigate. Such computer models display
processes  that   change  with   respect   to time.   Students  can  manipulate   the  model   and  get  feedback about  their
intervention by running a simulation. This form of CSCL ­ sometimes referred to as `single-display groupware' ­
has received some investment in terms of research. The third situation represents a learning environment where
students communicate face-to-face and simultaneously use a collaborative technology. It means that one part of their
communication will be face-to-face, while the other part will be computer-mediated. This situation is the object of
our study.

         The combination of face-to-face and computer-mediated communication is largely ignored by the CSCL
community.    CSCL    research   mainly    focuses  on situations   like distance collaboration, online  learning   and virtual
teaching   where  the  support   is primary    considered   as a   means  to bridge   time  and space   between  the students.
Overcoming time and space limitations has a direct added value, but it also leads to a specific focus. It considers
group interaction, in its broadest sense, as the main determinant for collaboration and learning.          However, research
into distance learning   indicates   that  it is  extremely difficult to  facilitate the full range  of  group  interactions by
collaborative technologies. Computer-mediated interactions are often restricted to those interactions that mirror the
cognitive processes in a group (Kreijns, Kirschner and Jochems, 2003). An enrichment of the information flow may
improve online collaborative learning: for example, students may use multiple tools simultaneously to enrich their
communication,     or they  may     use an    awareness  tool  that  provides  them   with  detailed information  about  their
performance. The aim of these interventions is to broaden the range of cognitions and behaviors that are necessary
for collaborative learning. They seem to reflect `a return' to the richness of face-to-face communication. Still, it
remains unclear if online collaboration can and should mirror its face-to-face counterpart. Research into computer
supported collaborative work (CSCW) seems to indicate otherwise (Olson & Olson, 2000; Kiesler & Cummings,
2002).

         We will argue that the partial orientation on online collaborative learning may limit our understanding of
the potentials of computer support. We would like to stress that most learning still takes place in classrooms where
the students are located near each other and collaborate face-to-face. Ignoring these face-to-face classroom situations
would deprive the CSCL community of a promising direction for research and development. We will present an
exploratory study to indicate that collaborative technologies may also be beneficial in situations where the students
are co-allocated (1).

Problem-solving discussions in the classroom
         Small-group learning has traditionally been studied in classroom settings where students meet face-to-face
to solve problems. (for an overview, see e.g., Cohen, 1994; Webb & Palincsar, 1996; Slavin, Hurley & Chamberlain,
2003). Small-group learning is often conceptualized as a problem-solving discussion between a group of students.
Problem-solving discussions generally consist of several interrelated phases that are directed towards the resolution of
a particular problem. Problem-solving discussions can be dynamic, difficult to grasp and hard to manage. Students
who solve a problem collaboratively have to manage different kinds of processes. On a general level, two processes
can be identified: students have to solve the problem and they must maintain a satisfying level of collaboration.
These  two  processes   are associated     with   two distinct types  of interactions, i.e. task-related and social-emotional
interactions (Bales, 1950).

Solving the problem: task-related interactions
         The first requirement ­ solving the problems ­requires a lot from the cognitive abilities of the students,
especially in the case of ill-structured or ill-defined problems. These types of problems don't fulfill the rational,
goal-directed  strategies   that are   associated   with  cognitive   analysis of    human  problem   solving.  They  refer  to
situations where   it isn't clear   at the beginning   what    the problem   exactly  is and  which  actions may  lead  to   the
solution of   the problem.   The    cognitive   processes that  underlie   the problem-solving   activities  of the group    are
difficult to model and open to different interpretations. Solving these problems requires the application of multiple

                                                                727                                                  CSCL 2007
perspectives and mutual knowledge. Different perspectives and mutual knowledge create opportunities for higher-
order thinking (Schwartz, 1995). The group processes that relate to `solving the problem' emerge from the task-
related interactions   within  the   group.   They  are  used to explicate  the task processes   in  groups.    It enables group
members to share and use knowledge and information that are directly related to task performance (Propp, 1999).

Group well-being: social-emotional interactions
         A second complicated factor has to do with maintaining a satisfying level of collaboration. When students
collaborate they have to maintain durable relationships and acceptable levels of participation. Interactions that are
associated  with    these aspects    of the group  performance   can   be  typified as social-emotional    interactions.   These
interactions  are    primarily  directed    towards  the  relationship between      group   members.   They     affect   student's
perception  of  the  other   group   members   and   the relationships they  form   (Propp,  1999).  The  minimal      number    of
categories of social-emotional interactions would include control and affection (Hare, 1960).

Facilitating collaborative learning
         A    shift  from  online    towards   face-to-face  collaborative  learning   brings along   a   shift in   the kind    of
interactions that should be mediated by the computer. Online collaborative learning seems to reflect an attitude of
`more support is better', i.e. a richer information flow between the students is seen as a guarantee for collaboration
and   learning. In   contrast, the   starting  point for  face-to-face collaborative   learning   is fundamentally      different:
students can already communicate without the support of computers. This observation draws the attention to those
interactions that can be facilitated by the collaborative technology and that would improve learning. It seems that
"less but  specific  support"     is the leading  principle.  When   the   students work    with the collaborative     tool, their
interactions will be distributed between the two modes of communication, i.e. an oral, face-to-face and an electronic,
computer mediated part. At least two questions have to be addressed when collaborative technologies are introduced
this setting:
-  What are the characteristics of an effective face-to-face problem-solving discussion in the classroom?
-  How can a collaborative technology, that mediates part of the communication between the students, improve a
   face-to-face discussion?

Effective face-to-face discussions
         We     will use  the  distinction   between    task-related and   social-emotional   interactions  as     a criterion for
qualifying group discussions and to identify requirements for computer support. It is assumed that the students may
benefit from a clear distinction between task-related and social-emotional interactions. Task-related interactions are
associated with learning. It leads to cognitive activities often referred to as knowledge elaborations, which, in turn,
are  responsible  for knowledge      acquisition  (Draskovic,  Holdrinet,   Bulte,  Bolhuis   &  Leeuwe,   2004).     This would
imply that the students should be encouraged to perform their task-related interactions within the shared workspace
of  the collaborative  tool.   It is  hypothesized   that this could   be  achieved  by   a design   that closely    matches   the
characteristics of effective task performance. Students will use the tool purely for task-related communication when
the characteristics of the tool facilitate the problem solving.

Computer mediated interactions
         One type of task-related interaction that has been associated with learning is "asking questions". The aim of
asking a question is to elicit a verbal response from those to whom the question is addressed (Keatsley, 1976).
Students may be encouraged to elaborate on existing knowledge when they ask questions. Knowledge elaboration,
on its turn, facilitates the acquisition of that knowledge (King, 1994). It is hypothesized that both `asking questions'
and `making comments' would stimulate a constructive problem-solving discussion between the students. Asking
question and giving comments may encourage the students to elaborate further on a topic by exhibiting behaviors
like giving   examples    to explain    an idea; providing  evidence   for a statement  or  giving   reasons as    grounds   for a
conclusion. Both communicative acts have the function to elicit a response. A question is more explicit in triggering
a response. Making a comment expresses of a reaction that, on it turn, may trigger a response from the `listener'.

         To   summarize,     we   identify  to following  principles  and  hypotheses   with  regard  to  computer     supported
collaborative learning in the classroom:
-  The task-related interactions will lead to knowledge elaborations.
-  Students will use the collaborative tool for task-related interactions when this tool is designed in such a way that
   it closely matches the conditions for effective task performance.

                                                               728                                                       CSCL 2007
-   A collaborative tool that stimulates task-related interactions like `asking  questions'   and  `making  comments'
    would stimulate a constructive problem-solving discussion.

        These   principles and hypotheses  are "translated"  into  the collaborative  tool as design principles. These
design principles will be evaluated in practice. The evaluation of these principles implies a test of the principles and
hypotheses that underlie the design. It means that we can draw conclusions about these principles and hypothesis
through the evaluation of the design. The design activities, in our study, are a natural continuation of the theory
development activities. The principles and hypothesis that we discussed are made applicable for evaluation through
the design.

Design research
        Our research approach is in accordance with the "design research" approach. Design research combines
theory-driven design with empirical educational research. The approach entails both `engineering' particular forms
of  learning and  systematically studying  those forms  of   learning  within   the context defined  by the  means  of
supporting them (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer & Schauble, 2003). It explicitly exploits the design process as an
opportunity to advance researchers' understanding of learning processes (Edelson, 2002).

        For   our research  we used a graphical  shared-workspace     tool: the Digalo. We    expected that the  Digalo
would stimulate task-related interactions that will lead to knowledge elaboration.    We used the two communicative
acts ­ i.e. asking questions and making comments ­ as a starting point for our design. They were implemented in the
notation system of the Digalo.

Digalo: The graphical shared-workspace tool
        The Digalo tool provides its users with a shared workspace based on a concept-mapping interface (Figure
2). Users can  put  forward contributions simultaneously  into a   shared   workspace  by  using a predefined notation
system. They can also relate associated contributions by drawing a link between these contributions.

                                  Figure 2. User interface of the Digalo tool

        A notation system consists of a set of labels or contribution cards that represents certain communicative
acts. The notation system that the students used in our study consists of three labels: 1) proposal, 2) question, and 3)
comment. A student has to select a label before she types in a text and places that text in the shared workspace.
Different types of contributions could be identified in the shared workspace by their shape. The student may want to
type in more text than the shape could contain. In that case could the student can type in additional text in the

                                                         729                                                  CSCL 2007
comment window. The additional text becomes visible when a student selects a contribution ­ i.e. shape ­ in the
shared workspace.

Methodology
          The research that we discuss in this paper has been carried out at a secondary school with a class of 5th
grade students of a Dutch language course. The class consists of 19 students, divided over groups of two or three
members. The seven groups had to write a paper for the school's board of directors. The paper should contain an
advice about how to promote a respectful discourse in the classroom. The policy note was a group product. The
pedagogical objectives associated with the assignment were:
-  developing discussion skills with an emphasis on analytical and argumentative skills,
-  developing collaborative skills,
-  developing writing skills.

          Our  study discusses   the  third lesson  of  a  sequence   of   6  lessons where   the  students  worked     on the
assignments. The third lesson consisted of two activities: 1) each student had to formulate a proposal about how the
school  should  improve   a respectful discourse   and  2) the   students  should discuss   the proposals   with  their group
members.   Each  group   of  students formulated   and  discussed    their proposal   with the  support  of the  Digalo.   The
students sat near each other so that they could communicate face-to-face.

Micro analysis of the Digalo mediated actions
          We have two sources of data for analysis: 1) audio recordings of verbal interaction during the discussion,
and  2) the  Digalo  mediated  actions  of  the students  that  were  recorded  by    the tool. Our  analysis of  the   Digalo
mediated actions were divided into two parts. First, we identified the sequences of related communicative acts. We
used graphical characteristics of the diagram to identify the interaction sequences. Second, we coded the individual
communicative acts of the students. We develop a coding schema that focused on the task-related interactions.

Interaction sequences
          We  focus  our analysis  on  the  interaction sequence  that  consists  of  related  communicative    actions  from
several students. A sequence consists of minimal three related actions. Weick (1979) defines such a sequence as a
double interact. An action by actor A evokes a specific response in actor B, which is then responded to by actor A
(Weick, 1979). The minimal amount of actions to make up a sequence consists of at least three related contributions
from at least two different students. The diagrams that represent the problem solving discussion of the students are
used to (re)organize the contributions for coding. To identify the interaction sequences we used two of the three
organizing principles ­ link and spatial grouping ­ that the students used to organize their diagrams (van Diggelen,
Overdijk  &   Andriessen,   2004). The  linking    principle refers  to  the  possibility  to draw  a link  between     related
contributions. The spatial grouping principle underlines that contributions that are displayed in close proximity from
each other, are related.

Individual communicative acts
          We  identified six different categories  of   actions that can   be associated   with the in-depth  elaboration   of
knowledge (Hargie & Dickson, 2004; King, 1994; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004). The six categories were associated
with  the two  types  of  contributions within   the  Digalo    environment   ­ question   and   comment    ­ that stimulate
elaboration (see Table 1):
-  Specify,
-  Inference,
-  Judgment and evaluation,
-  Application,
-  Comparison and contrast,
-  Conflict.

          A final category consists of non-task communication. Each sentence that was put forward in Digalo ­ and
is part of an interaction sequence ­ was coded by two coders (interrater reliability 0.9). We choose the sentence as
basic unit  of analysis  because   a  contribution generally    consisted  of several  sentences   and   students sometimes
addressed   several topics  in one   contribution. The  contributions   that  were  linked    with other contributions   were

                                                             730                                                   CSCL 2007
organized into a sequence of related contributions. These sequences were presented to the raters. Each contribution
was then analyzed on the level of sentences.
Table 1: Coding scheme

          Communicate act                 Code    Description
                        Specify           Qspe    Encourage respondents to examine an idea in more detail by
                                                  drawing attention to a neglected aspect of the idea.
                        Inference         Qinf    Encourage respondents to give evidence, arguments or reasons
 Question                                         (causes and consequences) or to reach a conclusion based on
 Evoke a response to                              evidence, arguments or reasons.
 provide unknown        Judgment and      Qjud    Encourage respondents to give an opinion, make value-judgments
 information or to      evaluation                or judge the relevance of solutions.
 rethink a previous
 action or response     Application       Qapp    Encourage respondents to provide examples, i.e. concrete or
                                                  specific instances of an idea or thought
                        Comparison        Qcom    Encourage respondents to consider similarities and differences
                        and contrast              between situations.
                        Conflict          Qconfl  Encourage respondents to consider alternative or opposite point
                                                  of views or positions.
                        Specify           Cspe    Provide a more detailed analysis or a clarification of ideas and
                                                  thoughts
                        Inference         Cinf    Provide evidence, arguments or reasons, reach conclusions or
                                                  make predictions
 Comment                Judgment and      Cjud    Express an opinion, make value-judgments or judge the relevance
 Express an opinion     evaluation                of solutions, listing advantages and disadvantages
 or a response          Application       Capp    Using examples, i.e. concrete and specific instances of an idea or
                                                  thought
                        Comparison        Ccom    Compare two situations to present similarities and differences,
                        and contrast              identify assumptions
                        Conflict          Cconfl  Defending one's point of view or position by argumentation or
                                                  further elaboration
 Others                                   O       non-task communication

Results
        The aim of our analysis it to explore how the interactions between the students split up in an oral and a
computer- mediated part. With regard to the computer-mediated part we also want to explore how the characteristics
of the tool affect the interactions within the tool. Two characteristics will be highlighted: the notation system and the
ability to relate associated contributions into a sequence of communicative acts.

The interplay between face-to-face and computer mediated interactions
        The  Digalo   tool in combination   with  face-to-face interaction led   to a  typical kind of problem-solving
discussion. All  the task-related interactions were  mediated  by  the   tool. All  utterances expressed in the  Digalo
concerned   the topical content  of the discussion. This in contrast  to research   findings with regard to research of
online collaborative  learning,  where  a considerable amount   of the   messages   is of a  social-emotional or meta-
cognitive nature (e.g. Pena-Shaff and Nicholls, 2004; Hara, Bonk and Angeli, 2000). This difference in findings may
be due to the fact that in our research the students were co-located and could also communicate orally.

                                                          731                                                  CSCL 2007
         Analysis   of the  recorded   face-to-face    discussions     reveals   that    this mode   of     communication   was     used
infrequently. Students  could    be   silent for  2 to  3 minutes.     When    they   did    communicate      orally, their utterances
referred to:
-  socio-emotional aspects of the collaboration, e.g. asking for help, tension release by telling a joke, giving positive
   feedback, keeping group members focused on the task;
-  planning of the activities, e.g. discussing the assignment;
-  regulative aspects of the collaboration, e.g. discussing rules for computer-mediated interactions.

         We   may   conclude     that  the   face-to-face      communication        involved   more      than   only  social-emotional
expressions. It also contained procedural messages that encompass the establishment and maintenance of procedures
and rules for arriving at a solution and goal-related expressions that pertain to establishment and monitoring of
group goals and values (see e.g. Poole and Hirokawa, 1996).

Notation system
         Figure 3   gives the percentages     of  utterances    for   each   category    of  the coding     scheme   (see  table 1)   that
represent different aspects of `in-depth elaboration' of knowledge. The students mainly asked "specifying questions"
(18%  of all  statements)   that encourage    respondents      to examine     an    idea in   more  detail.   The comments       that the
students made   are more    diverse:  students    gave  a more    detailed    account     of  their ideas    (18 %   Cspe), they    gave
reasons, evidence or arguments on which they base their ideas or thoughts (22% Cinf) or they expressed an opinion
or made value judgments (22% Cjud). The `comment' label was used more frequently than `question' label during
the students' interaction in the Digalo, despite the fact that a question is more explicit in triggering a response from a
group member.

                    25

                    20

                    15

                    10

                     5

                     0
                       Qspe   Qinf    Qjud  Qapp  Qcom  Qconfl  Cspe    Cinf   Cjud  Capp   Ccom  Cconfl

                    Figure 3. Percentage of `in-depth elaboration' of knowledge indicators

         One   can  conclude     that the   Digalo  environment       was    mainly   used    to  remove      uncertainty,  caused    by
ignorance or  imprecision    of  a shared    interpretation    of the  situation.    The    majority     of the  students' task-related
interactions were directed towards acquiring new information that helps the group to form an interpretation of the
situation. There were hardly any communicative acts that would reveal a conflict in interpretation. An analysis of the
interaction sequences of the 7 groups revealed three episodes of conflict. Conflict can be made visible in the Digalo
environment, although ­ in this case ­ it never leads to a process of negotiation within or outside the tool.

Interaction sequence
         Our analysis of the Digalo diagrams indicates that the 7 groups produced 37 sequences. Table 2 displays
the length of the sequences, i.e. the number of related contributions that make up a sequence. The length of a
sequence is an indication of how extensively the students elaborated on an idea.

                                                                  732                                                        CSCL 2007
Table 2: The length of the sequences

                                                    No. of contributions within a sequence
                                                           3     4    5    6    7    8     9    10
                          No. of sequences               14      9    7    2    0    2     0    3

        The interaction sequences in the Digalo emerged in a parallel order. They can be considered as "discussions
in a discussion". We named these sequences discussion lines. Figure 4 gives a graphical representation of group 4
that constructed six discussion lines in parallel (2.1, 2.2., 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6). The number of ­ parallel ­ discussion
lines for the seven groups varied between two and six. Groups of two students produced less discussion lines than
groups of three students.

                                     Figure 4. Interaction sequences of group 2

        A   graphical  analysis   of the students' behaviour     in  the shared workspace    revealed   that the students
constantly switched between    discussions  lines  (see Figure   5). The  students  "jump"  from  one  discussion line to
another; adding a contribution to a discussion line and then moving on to the next discussion line. In contrast to oral,
face-to-face discussions, students seemed less constrained to one dominant course of action when they discussed a
topic in the Digalo environment.

                 Figure 5. A spatial analysis of group 2 - jumping between discussion lines

Discussion
        Computer supported collaborative learning in the classroom have received relatively little attention within
the CSCL   community.   Still, it seems  to be a  distinct situation for  research that can  be set apart  from  the other
collaborative learning situations.   For example,  the  interactions  patterns that we  observed    in our study differed

                                                             733                                                 CSCL 2007
fundamentally from the ones that are generally observed during online collaboration ­ e.g. a clear division of task-
related and socio-emotional interactions ­ and during the purely face-to-face collaboration, e.g. the occurrence of
parallel discussion lines. These differences seem inherent for the specific learning situation that was the focus of our
study. The use of collaborative technologies for face-to-face collaborative learning seems to be a promising new
direction for CSCL research. The different forms of communication may trigger different learning mechanisms and
outcomes. Furthermore, a combination of computer-mediated and face-to-face communication create opportunities
to optimize both means of interaction in order to maximize collaboration and learning.

         The combination of both face-to-face and computer mediated communication raises new research questions
that can only be addressed to its full detail in that specific research setting. A more fundamental issue would, for
example, be the question: `what are the key characteristics of face-to-face learning situation?'           Olson and Olson
(2000)   identify several  characteristics of face-to-face  interactions in   a situation  of   close proximity   like  rapid
feedback, multiple channels, personal information, nuanced information, shared local context, informal `hall' time
before and after, co-reference, individual control, implicit cues and spatiality of reference. Still, it remains unclear if,
when and how these characteristics influence collaboration and learning. Answering this question may lead to new
insights that have important implications for both: online and face-to-face collaborative learning.

         The    use of  collaborative technology   may   also change   our  perception   of the    `traditional' face-to-face
discussions I the classroom. Some characteristics of these discussions may change fundamentally. A good example
may be the floor control mechanism. Verbal interactions in a traditional discussion are based on turn taking where
participants interact by taking turns. Our observations of the interactions in the Digalo tool indicates that some of the
`limitations' of turn taking may be may neutralized by the tool. A shared workspace that is based on simultaneous
access and the possibility to link related contributions enables the students to organize their discussion in a logical
order that reflects their reasoning, instead of organizing their discussion in a temporal order and where meaning is
based on adjacency of contributions like in a verbal discussion or a chat tool.

Endnotes
(1)  This study is part of a larger research project ­ the LEAD project ­ that aims to develop and study collaborative technology
     for face-to-face problem-solving discussions in the classroom. The LEAD    project is partially funded within  the Sixth
     Framework Program of the EC. Information about the LEAD project can be found on: http://www.lead2learning.org.

References
Bales, R.F. (1950). A set of categories for the analysis of small group interaction. American Sociological Review,
         15(2), 257-263.
Cohen, E.G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of Educational
         Research, 64(1), 1-35.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R. & Schauble, L. (2003). Design Experiments in Educational Research.
         Educational Researcher, 32, 9-13.
van Diggelen, W., Overdijk, M. and Andriessen, J. (2004). Constructing an argumentative map together: Organizing
         principles    and  their  application.   ICT  Symposium     Sociale    Processen   bij    Computerondersteunend
         Samenwerkend leren Utrecht: Universiteit Utrecht, ICO/ISOR Onderwijskunde, 23 -30.
Dillenbourg,   P. (1999).  Introduction: What   do   you mean   by  "Collaborative  learning"?   In   P. Dillenbourg    (Ed.),
         Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp.1-19). Oxford: Pergamon.
Draskovic,  I., Holdrinet,  R., Bulte, J., Bolhuis,   S. & van   Leeuwe,   J. (2004).   Modelling    small  Group  learning.
         Instructional Science, 32, 447-473.
Edelson, D.C. (2002). Design Research: What we Learn when we Engage in Design. The Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 11, 105-121.
Goffman, E. (1963). Behavior in public places: Notes on the social organization of gatherings. New York: The Free
         Press.
Hara,  N., Bonk,    C.J. &  Angeli,   C. (2000).   Content analysis  of  online  discussions    in an  applied   educational
         psychology course. Instructional Science, 28, 115-152.
Hargie, O. and Dickson, D. (2004). Skilled interpersonal communication: Research, theory and practice. London:
         Routledge.
Jermann,   P., Soller, A.  & Muehlenbrock,      M. (2001).  From    mirroring to guiding:   A   review   of state  of the art
         technology    for supporting    collaborative learning. Proceedings     of the   first European    Conference    on
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

                                                            734                                                     CSCL 2007
Kearsley, G. P. (1976). Questions and question asking in verbal discourse: A cross-disciplinary review. Journal of
         Psycholinguistic Research, 5, 355-375.
Kiesler, S. & Cummings, J.N. (2002). What do we know about proximity and distance in work groups? In P. Hinds
         and S. Kiesler (Eds.), Distributed Work. Cambrige, MA: MIT Press.
King, A.  (1994).  Autonomy   and   question asking:  The    role of personal   control  in  guided student-generated
         questioning. Learning and Individual Differences, 6(2), 163-185.
Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P.A. &   Jochems,   W. (2003), Identifying   the pitfalls for social interaction  in computer-
         supported collaborative learning environments: A review of research. Computers in Human Behavior, 19,
         335-353.
Olson, G.M. & Olson, J.S. (2000). Distance matters. Human-Computer Interaction, 15, 139-178.
Pena-Shaff,  J.B. and Nicholls,  C. (2004). Analyzing  student    interaction and meaning    construction in  computer
         bulletin board discussions. Computers and Education, 42, 243-265.
Poole, M.S. & Hirokawa, R.Y. (1996). Introduction: Communication and group decision making. In M.S. Poole &
         R.Y  Hirokawa   (Eds.), Communication   and   Group   Decision   making    (2nd edition). Sage   Publications:
         London.
Propp, K.M. (1999). Collective information processing in groups. In L.R. Frey, D.S. Gouran &M.S. Poole (Eds.),
         The Handbook of Group Communication Theory and Research (pp. 225-250). Sage Publications, Thousand
         Oaks.
Reimann, P. (2003). How to support groups in learning: More than problem solving. Supplementary Proceedings of
         the 11th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp. 3-16), Sydney, Australia.
Slavin, R.E., Hurley, E.A. & Chamberlain, A. (2003). Cooperative learning and achievement: Theory and research.
         In W.M. Reynolds, G.E. Millar & I.B. Weiner (Eds.), Handbook of Psychology (pp. 177-198). New Jersey:
         John Wiley.
Webb, N.M. & Palincsar, A.S. (1996). Group processes in the classroom. In D.C. Berliner & R.C. Calfee (Eds.),
         Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 841-873). New York: MacMillan.

                                                         735                                                  CSCL 2007
