 Virtual Communities of Care: Online Peer Networks with Post-Organ
                                              Transplant Youth
                                Marina Bers, Clement Chau, Keiko Satoh, Laura Beals
                                Tufts University, 105 College Ave., Medford, MA 02155
        Email: marina.bers@tufts.edu, clement.chau@tufts.edu, keiko.satoh@tufts.edu, laura.beals@tufts.edu

         Abstract: This paper discusses the Virtual Communities of Care Project that uses a 3D virtual
         environment,     Zora,  to  support   a psycho-educational    intervention   for  pediatric    post-organ
         transplant patients. These patients have difficulties in developing a peer network due to chronic
         illness, and as a result they are often incompliant to medical and other requirements. Our goals are
         to examine   the    extent to which  we  can  leverage  youth interest  in technologies  to  develop  an
         intervention  to  support   peer  network  building  and   medical adherence.    During an   eight-week
         intervention, participants    engage in weekly   online group  and    individual activities in Zora. We
         describe here the intervention and preliminary data to illustrate the objectives of this project.

Introduction
         Virtual environments     present  an opportunity  to promote  the  positive development     of young  people  and
their communities (Barab et al., 2002; Bers, 2006). Such technologies can support the development of youth with
life-long medical risk or chronic illness (Bers et al., 2003), who, due to their condition, may not be able to attend
school regularly and have difficulty forming peer relationships. In the past, most young people with serious chronic
illness, such as those needing organ transplants, would not survive. Today, advances in medicine make it possible to
extend the length of their life. However, psycho-social services lag behind medical advances, and youth who benefit
from medical treatment still have difficulties adjusting to lifestyle changes and are often incompliant to medical and
dietary restriction  (Rosina,  Crisp,  &   Steinbeck,  2003). Consequently,    they  face medical    complications  despite
surgeries and treatment. Rejection to treatment (e.g., organ rejection) is a big problem that these patients are facing.

         The goal of this pilot project is to examine the extent to which we can leverage youth's interests in online
technologies to create an intervention to improve the overall well-being and health of these young patients. For this
research, we developed a psycho-educational program that engages post-transplant youth to participate in Zora, a 3D
multi-user  environment    (Bers,   2001). The   goals are to:  (1) facilitate peer  networking, (2)    encourage  medical
adherence,  and  (3) support   their adjustment  to lifestyle changes. This    paper provides an     overview of this pilot
program; discusses the context of this research, the curriculum and technology used; and presents preliminary data.

Theoretical Frameworks
         This research    is guided  by  two  theoretical frameworks,  Applied   Developmental   Science   (ADS;   Lerner,
2000) and Constructionism (Papert, 1999).     ADS focuses on     the dynamic relations between   individuals  and contexts.
It integrates developmental research with programs and policies that promote positive development by emphasizing
the strengths and assets of young people, instead of focusing on preventing risk-taking behaviors. The strengths and
assets are categorized into the "Six C's of Positive Youth Development" and they include: Competence (cognitive
and behavioral   skills), Connection   (positive relationships), Character  (moral   centeredness),  Confidence    (positive
self-worth), Caring (empathy), and Contribution (orientation to civic contribute). While most programs conceived
within the ADS model have not attended to the role of new technologies in young people's lives or have limited
their use to information delivery, this research extends the framework to examine the extent to which networked
technologies could support the development of these assets and promote positive development in youth (Bers, 2006).

         This research also draws upon Papert's Constructionism.       Based on Piaget's Constructivism (Papert, 1999;
Piaget, 1965), constructionism asserts that people learn better when they engage in personally meaningful projects
and sharing them with others. Instead of learning as information transmission, it posits that youth can play an active
role in their learning and hence promote their development. Thus, the role of technology and learning is to provide
the resources necessary to make good choices and engage in behaviors that would lead to learning and development.
Drawing from these two frameworks, the guiding principles of this research are to provide the necessary context and
tools to assist youth in forming positive social networks and to encourage them in adhering to medical requirements.
These aspects of their lives are imperative in ensuring healthy development and overall well-being.

                                                             75                                                   CSCL 2007
The Virtual Communities of Learning and Care Project
         The NSF funded Virtual Communities of Learning and Care (VCLC) Project is a collaboration between a
children's hospital in northeast U.S. and our research team. Working closely with physicians and staff at the hospital
(including   surgeons, psychiatrists, nurses,  social  workers,   and  IT    staff), we  conceive  this   as a pilot    intervention
research looking at the use of 3D virtual environments to promote healthy development in pediatric patients.

         Hospital physicians referred 22 patients (13 males) between the ages of 11 and 15 for this study. Using a
delayed-treatment methodology, the sample is divided into two groups with one group beginning four months before
the second. We provide computers and Internet to those without the necessary equipment, and thus no participants
are excluded due to a lack of technology. The environment they log onto is a secured one that only participants and
coordinators can access. Online activities are recorded by a log system and reviewed daily to ensure safety. The
project  design includes  communication        with  clinicians   if concerns    become    apparent    in regard     to participant
interactions or other issues indicative of problems in their well-being; however, no such incidence has occurred.

         This pilot project uses a virtual environment, Zora, to assist young patients in developing a peer support
network and foster medical adherence. Developed as an Identity Construction Environment, Zora provides tools to
design  and  inhibit a virtual city  (Bers  et al., 2001).  Participants     populate  the virtual city   by making     interactive
creations, including 3D objects, characters, message boards, and signs. Each creation consists of various properties,
including  a description, value   designations    and definitions,   and narratives   to help express     meaning    and  personal
stories. Zora also provides a real-time chat for participants to communicate while navigating throughout the virtual
world.  The  environment  is designed    to provide   both  synchronous      and asynchronous    modes    of   communication      in
order to accommodate different personalities as well as afford them a chance to self-reflect upon their narratives,
values, and stories. This type of self-reflection is an important process in healthy youth development (Eccles, 1999).

         Over a period of eight months (or four months for group 2), participants logged onto Zora at any time they
wish  to explore the   virtual city  and to   populate  it with   personally    meaningful   images    and   objects    along  with
narratives and value designations. Participants also take part in weekly one-hour group activities that range from
icebreakers  to discussions    about  dietary  requirements     and   medicines.     Group  activities   are designed     to  foster
collaborations among participants to promote community building in Zora. For example, participants collaboratively
built a Halloween house consisting of favorite stories and images from each participant. Other examples include a
Zora restaurant, pharmacy, Zora zoo, etc. It is clear from the beginning that, while the virtual environment affords
tools for participants to express themselves individually, group activities successfully bring the community together.

         Another  example      is the   monthly   newsletter,   Transplant      Times,   written by    participants     about  their
experience. It is printed and distributed to families and physicians as a way to share their experience. This allows
participants to collaborate online to create a product that is shared to others outside of the virtual city. Participants
choose a monthly theme and topics to write about; they collaborate and share responsibilities such as graphic design,
writing, and editing. Through the newsletter, participants share their experience with their family and physicians and
it becomes   a permanent   artifact  of their  activities. The  intention    of this  newsletter   is to  illustrate to  them  that
knowledge, relationships, and connections built in Zora can be carried beyond the virtual realm and impact their life.

         In addition to building a network, activities are also intended to promote certain assets in participants in
hope to increase medical adherence and quality of life. One of Zora's features is that participants are given the tools,
not the content, to learn about specific issues (i.e., medical adherence in this case), in ways that are meaningful to
them. So instead of planting a "Health Museum" that is dense with information, participants are asked to research
about  their own or  other's transplant  stories  and  build 3D      objects and narratives  to  communicate     their   ideas and
make their own museum. This approach is aligned with the Constructionist approach to learning. Finally, physicians
and nurses at the hospital periodically attend group sessions to interact with their patients via the Zora system.

Data Collection
         Data collection includes three activities. An online log provides qualitative data (activities and coding of
3D creations) and quantitative data (e.g., log-on frequency and number of objects created). Participants completed
questionnaires addressing research questions such as changes in coping strategies, medical adherence, the six Cs of
Positive Youth   Development,     and   attitudes about technologies.    In   addition,  home-visits     are conducted    to  get a
picture of the home context in which they log onto Zora and feedback about their experience.

                                                               76                                                         CSCL 2007
Preliminary Results
         This paper primarily draws on qualitative and descriptive data from the Zora log and anecdotal accounts
from  Group   1  phase  of the study to provide   an overview   of the project.  Participants logged onto   the system on
average 2.6 hours per week. They took on different roles in the virtual city; some participants tended to decorate and
build objects while others focused on sharing stories and chatting. Over the first four months, they created 1,375
objects, ranging from self-portrait pictures to objects representing discussion about health, transplants, and medicine.

The project has been successful in fostering narrative sharing. For example, a participant wrote this story on one of
the 3D  objects  in his virtual house:  "I  received my  liver  on [date]. I was  only  [age] at the time.  I received the
message while attending a Halloween Party, and me and my family took a jet out to [city]. The donator was a baby
girl, named   [name],   who   died of SIDS     or sudden   infant  death syndrome."    Besides   building  Zora  creations,
participants have also shown interest in the newsletter. Topics have included: featured citizens and houses, tips and
tricks for remembering medication, citizens' artwork, and websites for kids. Interview responses have shown that
the   newsletter is a  motivating  factor  for participants to  continue   their active participation.  For instance,  one
participant stated, "It was exciting to see my drawings printed. I will do more next time." Physicians and families
have also responded positively about the newsletter as a way to get a sense of what participants are doing online.
Although   we    do not experimentally    control  for the  effect of  the newsletters,  responses   have   supported  our
hypothesis that the newsletter helps connect participants' online activities with their real-life experience.

         During   one-on-one    interviews, participants commented     positively  about  the  project  in regard to  their
adherence and personal development. In particular, participants discussed how, prior to meeting others in Zora, they
felt isolated because other peers "don't really get the seriousness of the matter" and "no one really understands."

Implications and Next Steps
         The Virtual Communities of Learning and Care project is a pilot program to examine the extent to which
we can leverage youth's interests in technologies to develop interventions to promote positive youth development.
This  project showed    that new  technologies  can  augment    psycho-therapeutic  services  available to  post-transplant
pediatric patients to help them build stronger peer networks and develop motivation for medical adherence.

         Preliminary data, e.g. interview responses and activity logs, identified several components that are central
to this project's success. Connecting participants' online experience with real-life (i.e., the newsletter) was critical to
our primary objective of motivating them in making positive life decisions (i.e., medical adherence) through their
online experience. Future work may look at multi-hospital programs to connect patients from different geographic
regions, as well as including patients from different medical units rather than focusing on post transplant patients.

References
Barab, S., Thomas, M., Dodge, T., Carteaux, R., and Tuzun, H. (2002). Empowerment design work: Building
         participant structures that transform. Proceedings of the CSCL, Seattle, WA.
Bers, M. (2006). The role of new technologies to foster positive youth development. Applied Developmental
         Science, 10(4), 200­219.
Bers, M., Gonzalez-Heydrich, J., DeMaso, D. (2001). Identity Construction Environments: Supporting a virtual
         therapeutic community of pediatric patients undergoing dialysis. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
         Human Factors in Computing Systems, 380­387.
Bers, M., Gonzalez-Heydrich, J., DeMaso, D. (2003). Use of a computer-based application in a pediatric hemo-
         dialysis unit: A pilot study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 42(4),
         493­496.
DeMaso, D., Twente, A., Spratt, E., O'Brien, P. (1995). Impact of psychological function, medical severity & family
         functioning in pediatric heart transplantation. Journal of Heart and Lung Transplant, 14(6), 1102­1108.
Eccles, J. (1999). The development of children ages 6 to 14. The Future of Children, 9(2), 30­44.
Lerner, R. (2000). Developing civil society through the promotion of positive youth development. Journal of
         Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, (21)1, 48­49.
Papert, S. (1999). The children's machine: rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York: Basic Books.
Piaget, J. (1965). The child's conception of number. New York: W. W. Norton and Company.
Rosina, R., Crisp, J., Steinbeck, K. (2003). Treatment adherence of youth and young adults with and without a
         chronic illness. Nursing and Health Sciences, 5(2), 139­147.

                                                             77                                                  CSCL 2007
