The Student Becomes the Master: Integrating Peer Tutoring with
                                      Cognitive Tutoring

               Erin Walker1, Nikol Rummel2, Bruce M. McLaren1, Kenneth R. Koedinger1
         1Human Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
                    2Institute of Psychology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
           {erinwalk, koedinger, bmclaren}@cs.cmu.edu; rummel@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

         Abstract: Combining peer tutoring with an intelligent tutoring system (ITS) holds the
         promise of augmenting the current benefits of the ITS. We designed and implemented a
         peer tutoring approach as an addition to the Cognitive Tutor Algebra (CTA), an ITS for
         high school  algebra.  We  then  used 30  students  to  evaluate   the potential  of the peer
         tutoring  addition  to increase   learning. Although    students   learned   and    interacted
         positively, peer tutors lacked the necessary expertise to adequately help their tutees.

Introduction
         Combining   collaborative  activities with  intelligent   tutoring might   be    an  effective way        of
increasing student  knowledge.  The   guided problem-solving    provided    by  an ITS  is effective   but limits
student construction of knowledge, while collaborative activities increase the potential for the acquisition
of deep  knowledge   but  do not   always  provide  sufficient guidance   for   students. Our    work  integrates
collaborative learning with an ITS using a peer tutoring framework, with the goal of allowing students to
tutor each other through the interface of an ITS, supported by both cognitive and collaborative tutoring.
However, implementing a peer tutoring script within the context of an existing ITS may not require much
computer tutoring to be effective, for two reasons: Students who have used the ITS already have a mental
model for how the cognitive tutoring works in the ITS, making it easier for them to assume the tutoring
role, and as the student interaction is structured through the interface of the ITS, it might be easier to
implement   script elements  than  if students  were   interacting  face-to-face.   Additional    cognitive  and
collaborative tutoring would only be necessary if students do not comply with the script. Therefore, our
first step is to implement a baseline peer tutoring condition within the context of an existing ITS: the
Cognitive Tutor Algebra. We use the interface of the ITS to structure the interaction between the students,
but we do not provide hints and feedback to the students as they collaborate. The effectiveness of this
condition at increasing learning will indicate whether and how to provide adaptive support.

Script Design and Implementation
         We incorporated elements of previous successful peer tutoring scripts into our intervention. Peer
tutoring has been shown to be effective when students exhibit certain behaviors. Asking specific questions,
receiving elaborated explanations, and using those explanations constructively have been correlated with tutee
learning (Webb,   Troper, &  Fall, 1995).  Students  learn from  being tutors   if they prepare   ahead  of  time
(Fantuzzo, Riggio,  Connelly,   &  Dimeff, 1992),  monitor  skills being  acquired  (Fuchs    et al., 2003), and
provide their partners with elaborated explanations (King, Staffieri, & Adelgais, 1998). Biswas, Schwartz,
Leelawong, Vye, and the TAG-V (2005) identified three aspects of learning interactions that seem to explain
the benefits of learning by teaching: students take responsibility for, reflect on, and structure their knowledge.

         In our peer tutoring script, students are given a task like "Solve for x," for an equation like "ax +
by = c." Students go through two phases: a preparation phase and a collaboration phase. In the preparation
phase, peer tutors are given a chance to practice with the material ahead of time by solving problems using
the CTA. They use an equation solver tool to manipulate the equation, and are given immediate feedback
from the cognitive tutoring component of the CTA when they make a mistake. They can also ask for a hint
from the CTA at any time. As they solve the problem, they are given feedback on their progress through a
skillometer, which contains bars that represent their skills and change in value with correct and incorrect
student actions. During the collaboration phase, students are grouped into same-gender pairs of similar
abilities and collaborate at different computers, taking turns being peer tutors and peer tutees. Peer tutees
solve the same problems as their tutor solved in the preparation phase, using the same interface. Peer tutors

                                                     750                                                    CSCL 2007
can see  their   peer tutee's actions, but cannot   solve the    problem    themselves.   Instead,  they    are given  a
printout of their own answers to that particular problem, and take the role of the cognitive tutor. They can
mark the peer tutee's actions right or wrong, and adjust the values of the tutee's skill bars. There is also a
chat tool, where tutees can ask questions and tutors can give explanations.

         We added two additional activities to extend the script and guide students in their interaction.
First, during   the preparation   phase, we  gave   students    questions   to prepare  them    for the  collaborative
challenges   of  tutoring as  well as  the cognitive  ones      (e.g., "A good  question    is specific. It  asks  why
something is done, or what would happen if the problem was solved a certain way. What is a good question
to ask about the step you chose in Question 2?"). Second, we gave students three additional reflection
questions after they had just finished tutoring a problem (e.g., "What was the best question asked by the
tutee? If the tutee didn't ask any questions, what was a good question he/she could have asked?"). We
implemented the peer tutoring within the context of a more general collaborative framework added to the
Cognitive Tutor Algebra (CTA).

Script Evaluation
         We compared two conditions, one in which students tutored each other using the CTA interface
by following the preparation and collaboration phases (the tutoring condition), and one in which students
tutored  each   other  using  the  CTA    interface and were        given the  additional   collaborative   instruction
described in the previous paragraph (the tutoring+reflection condition). We hypothesized that peer tutoring
would   increase  student  learning   in both   conditions,     but giving  students additional     instruction  would
enhance the effects of the peer tutoring. See Table 1 for a description of the experimental procedure. To
assess student learning we used a counterbalanced pretest and posttest, each containing 8 questions drawn
from the same unit as the treatment questions.

         Participants were 30 high-school students from two first-year algebra classes at a vocational high
school. Both classes were taught by the same teacher. Due to the disruptiveness of students in the same
class  using  different   interventions, we  used   a between-class       manipulation.   The   class with   the  most
participants  was   assigned  to  the tutoring+reflection   condition.    Only  14  participants  participated    in all
phases of the study (pretest, preparation for tutoring, peer tutoring, and posttest): seven in the tutoring
condition, and seven in the tutoring+reflection condition. Unfortunately, there were significant between-
class differences: students in the tutoring+reflection condition were working on a significantly lower unit in
the Cognitive Tutor Algebra prior to the study (Ms = Unit 8.3 and Unit 11.6, SDs = 1.25 and 2.76, F(1,12)
= 8.22, p = .01).

Table 1. Experimental procedure. Differences between conditions are highlighted by italics.

Day        Activity       Time             Tutoring Condition                   Tutoring + Reflection Condition
1       Pretest           10 min.   - pretest on domain knowledge               - pretest on domain knowledge
2       Overview          15 min.   - overview of tutoring interface            - overview of tutoring interface
2       Preparation       40 min.   - students solve the problems they will     - students solve the problems they will
        Phase                       be tutoring                                 be tutoring
                                                                                - students answer reflection questions
3       Collaboration     50 min.   - students tutor each other                 - students tutor each other
        Phase                                                                   - students answer reflection questions
3       Posttest          10 min.   - posttest on domain knowledge              - posttest on domain knowledge

Results
         We scored the pretests and posttests on a 5 point scale. We then conducted a two-way (condition x
test-time) repeated-measure       ANOVA,    with  test-time     as  the   repeated measure.    Posttest  scores   were
significantly higher than pretest scores in both the tutoring and the tutoring+reflection condition (F (1,12) =
15.25, p < .002, ² = 0.56), but there were no significant differences between conditions, and no interaction
(see Table 2). To further examine what occurred during the collaboration phase we turned to log data and
notes from classroom observation. During peer tutoring, students appeared engaged, and did exhibit many
of the positive collaborative behaviors that we were attempting to encourage with our script and that have
been shown to correlate with knowledge construction and self-reflection. However, we observed that peer

                                                         751                                                       CSCL 2007
tutors struggled to provide tutees with answers, and did not connect the preparation that they had done with
the collaboration phase. For instance, they often did not consult their answer printouts when they did not
know the next problem step and thus had to rely on teacher assistance to solve a problem. As a result, tutees
skipped problems without completing them correctly. This undesirable behavior differed between the two
conditions (see Table 2). Students in the tutoring condition attempted more problems than students in the
tutoring+reflection condition, and appeared to complete more problems as well. The average number of
problems completed by dyads in the tutoring+reflection condition was low; students in this group took an
average of 11 minutes to complete a single problem, compared to a 6 minute average in the tutoring
condition. Students in the tutoring condition tended to skip problems they could not solve, completing less
than  60% of the problems   they  attempted. Immediately    before skipping      a problem,    students would
generally state their inability to solve it, "I don't know how to do this one," or their lack of motivation,
"Just do something and I'll agree or something." If students skip problems, they may not learn how to solve
difficult problems. However, if they do not complete many problems, they may not be sufficiently exposed
to all the skills involved in the unit, and will be given fewer opportunities to master them.

Table 2. Attempted problems and interaction data for the two conditions

                         Pretest Score       Posttest Score      Problems                Problems
                                                                 Attempted               Completed
Condition                Mean      SD        Mean       SD       Mean      SD            Mean        SD
             Tutoring       31.1      25.4      45.8       31.8     14.2           8.47         8.4      5.13
 Tutoring + Reflection      22.9      15.3      42.8       22.0      5.8           3.11         4.4      0.89

Conclusion
        Although students learned as a result of the peer tutoring, we did not find that the condition with
additional tutoring instruction learned more than the condition without additional instruction. Instead, many
students had difficulty following the peer tutoring script effectively. Students in the tutoring group tended
to skip past problems they could not solve, while students in the tutoring+reflection condition completed
fewer problems than students in the tutoring group. Increasing the number of problems that students are
able to correctly complete while collaborating should improve student learning, because students will be
given more of an opportunity to master the skills required by different problems. Adding adaptive feedback
should allow peer tutors to more effectively and accurately help their partners.

References
Biswas, G., Schwartz, D. L., Leelawong, K., Vye, N., & TAG-V. (2005). Learning by teaching: A new
        agent paradigm for educational software. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 19, 363­392.
Fantuzzo, J. W., Riggio, R. E., Connelly, S., & Dimeff, L. A. (1992). Effects of reciprocal peer tutoring on
        mathematics    and  school  adjustment:    A  componential  analysis.      Journal     of  Educational
        Psychology, 84(3), 331-339.
Fuchs, L.S., Fuchs, D., Prentice, K., Burch, M., Hamlett, C.L., Owen, R., & Schroeter, K. (2003).
        Enhancing third-grade students' mathematical problem solving with self-regulated learning
        strategies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 306-315.
King, A., Staffieri, A., &  Adelgais,  A.  (1998). Mutual   peer tutoring: Effects    of  structuring   tutorial
        interaction to scaffold peer learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 134-152.
Walker, E., Koedinger, K. R., McLaren, B. M. and Rummel, N. Cognitive Tutors as Research Platforms:
        Extending an Established Tutoring System for Collaborative and Metacognitive Experimentation.
        In the Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Jhongli,
        Taiwan, June 26-30, 2006.
Webb, N.M., Troper, J.D., & Fall, R. (1995). Constructive activity and learning in collaborative small
        groups. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 406-423.

Acknowledgement
This research is supported by the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center, NSF Grant # 0354420.

                                                    752                                                   CSCL 2007
