  Thinking Hard Together: the Long and Short of Collaborative Idea
                                   Generation in Scientific Inquiry

Hao-Chuan Wang, Carolyn P. Rosé, Yue Cui, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh PA 15213
                         Email: haochuan@cs.cmu.edu, cprose@cs.cmu.edu, ycui@cs.cmu.edu
     Chun-Yen Chang, National Taiwan Normal University, 88, Sec. 4, Ting-Chou Rd., Taipei Taiwan 116
                                               Email: changcy@ntnu.edu.tw
   Chun-Chieh Huang, Tsai-Yen Li, National Chengchi University, 64, Sec. 2, Zhi-Nan Rd., Taipei Taiwan 116
                                      Email: g9415@cs.nccu.edu.tw, li@nccu.edu.tw

        Abstract: Idea generation is a cognitive process that plays a central role in inquiry learning tasks.
        This paper presents results from a controlled experiment in which we investigate the affect on
        productivity     and learning    from  doing  idea generation   tasks  individually versus   in pairs, with
        versus   without   automatic   support   from   a virtual  brainstorming agent    called VIBRANT.       Our
        finding is that individuals brainstorming with VIBRANT produced more ideas than individuals
        who brainstormed with a human peer.          However, an additional finding is that while brainstorming
        in    pairs lead to  short term   process  losses  in terms   of  idea generation,  with  a  corresponding
        reduction    in  learning  in terms   of pre to post  test gains, it produced   a productivity  gain   for a
        subsequent distinct individual inquiry task.       Furthermore, automatically generated feedback from
        VIBRANT improved learning during idea generation but did not mitigate the process losses that
        were associated with reduced learning in the pairs conditions.

Introduction
           Inquiry as an approach to learning typically consists of such activities as exploring the targeted phenomena,
formulating and asking questions, making discoveries, achieving deeper understanding, and fulfilling intellectual
curiosity. Virtually every inquiry activity begins with "asking questions" after which students may be requested to
move on    to  "finding  answers"     or "testing  the  solutions",   and subsequently,   "asking   better questions".  Idea
generation is of central importance in this process.

        We are conducting our investigation in connection with the Debris Flow Hazard task (DFH), which is an
example    of an inquiry  problem   used  by   science  educators  as  an assessment   of creative  problem   solving ability
(Chang & Weng 2002).         The DFH task is defined by the following two idea generation prompts: "What are the
possible factors that might cause a debris-flow hazard to happen?", and subsequently, "How could we prevent it
from happening?" Notice that the goal for students here is not to select and then apply a known procedure for
solving a well defined problem. In contrast, the purpose here is to let students work first to define the problem and
then creatively formulate the candidate problem solving steps/options. Beyond offering students the opportunity to
generate possible solutions to problems, these tasks offer students the opportunity to weigh and balance trade-offs
between alternative solutions since there is no single correct solution to the problem.

        Based    on  cognitive   theories  of  associative memory,     idea  generation can be   viewed    as the  process of
building on the retrieval of information encoded in a stimulated portion of a semantic network stored in one's long-
term memory (Brown & Paulus, 2002; Dugosh et al., 2000; Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006).            When students have access to
domain facts either through their own memory or provided externally through access to learning resources, students
may engage    in a  constructive   process  to bridge  instances   of domain   facts on the way   towards  generating  ideas
(Brown & Paulus, 2002).      For example, students may have access to the following two domain facts: (1) Debris flow
refers to the mass movement of rocks and sedimentary materials in a fluid like manner. And, (2) There are many
typhoons,  or  hurricanes,   in Taiwan   in the  summer    time.   Students  may  then  make   the  following  two   bridging
inferences: (1) Heavy rain implies the presence of a massive amount of water.          And, (2) The presence of a massive
amount of water may lead to erosion or the movement of rocks in a fluid like manner.           They may then generate the
following idea: "Typhoons may be a factor leading to the occurrence of a debris flow hazard."                 As students are
generating  these   bridging inferences,  they   are elaborating  their mental  representation   of the basic  facts they  are
building on.   This process of building bridging inferences and subsequently elaborating mental representations is
similar in many ways to the process of self explanation (Chi et al., 1994).      In the learning sciences, self-explanation
has been shown to be an effective learning process.         Thus, through this constructive idea generation process, we

                                                              753                                                   CSCL 2007
expect to find a relationship between idea generation and learning much like the one that has been shown in many
contexts between self-explanation and learning, and in fact we did find such a relationship, which we discuss below.

         While idea generation in groups is purported to be more effective than idea generation for individuals, it is
a well known problem that when groups engage in idea generation together, a phenomenon referred to as process
loss occurs.   In  particular, it has been   repeatedly demonstrated    that  a group   that is interacting  while  doing  idea
generation   together    may   not always    perform   better than  a   collection   of non-interacting    individuals  whose
contributions are simply pooled afterwards (i.e., nominal groups), both in terms of the quantity and quality of unique
ideas, and in fact may sometimes perform significantly worse (Hill, 1982; Diehl & Stroebe, 1987; Nijstad & Stroebe,
2006).   Often inquiry learning tasks such as the DFH task are done collaboratively in the classroom.             To the extent
that learning in inquiry tasks may come from the constructive process of generating ideas, we expect that factors that
negatively affect idea generation productivity, such as the presence of evaluative statements (Dugosh et al., 2000) or
exposure to instances of ideas that are close to the current idea generation focus (Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006), will also
have a negative effect on learning from inquiry tasks where idea generation is involved.            As we discuss below, we
did find such a pattern in our data, which argues that the phenomenon of process losses in idea generation is a
problem that should be taken seriously by learning scientists.       Nevertheless, learning in idea generation tasks may
arise from multiple different mechanisms, not only from the idea generation process per se.               For example, while
evaluative  statements    may   inhibit productivity   in  idea   generation,   they count   as  a  form  of  transactivity  in
collaborative discourse, which shows that group members are attending to one another's contributions and making
explicit links between their contributions and those that came before.        Supporting such behavior has been shown in
other work to support learning (Weinberger et al., 2005).

         While    much   research  has  been  done  separately  on  learning  from   inquiry  tasks in   the learning sciences
community and the problem of process losses in connection with group idea generation in the social psychology of
group work, in this paper we bring these two lines of research together to explore a particular question: How do the
process losses that are a well known problem for group idea generation impact learning from inquiry tasks?                 And
furthermore, how can we support learning by mitigating these process losses?               Or do we gain more in terms of
learning by enhancing other processes at work that may lead to learning even if they inhibit idea generation?             In the
remainder of this paper we formally explore the connection between learning and idea generation in inquiry tasks
through an experimental study.     While the results show that even with automatic idea generation support, we still see
evidence of process losses connected with a loss in learning, we do see a positive effect on learning of the automatic
support mechanism we introduce.         Furthermore,    we  find  a positive  impact    of collaborative  idea  generation  on
preparation for a subsequent idea generation task.

Hypotheses and Model
         The hypotheses underlying our investigation grow out of the social psychology literature on creativity and
group brainstorming as well as the cognitive science literature on associative memory and collaborative learning.
The model presented in Figure 1 depicts the hypothesized causal links between interventions (i.e., whether students
worked   with  feedback   from    the VIBRANT       agent  or not,  and whether    they  worked    in pairs  or   individually),
mediating variables (i.e., cognitive stimulation and social interaction), and dependent measures important in inquiry
learning tasks (i.e., productivity in idea production and learning). In the figure, a "+" symbol denotes a positive
influence imposed by the node at the initial end of the arrow on the node at final the end of the arrow, while a "++"
symbol represents a qualitatively stronger positive influence, and a "-" symbol denotes a negative influence. Circled
numbers are included to enhance clarity. Link (a) represents the positive effect of priming stimuli on associative
memory activation (Brown & Paulus, 2002; Dugosh et al., 2000).          Link (b) denotes the potential learning benefit of
knowledge construction (analogous to the process of self-explanation) triggered by the idea generation process (Chi
et al., 1994). Link   (c) is an   inhibitory influence on  idea  generation,  possibly  due   to a  diversion from    pure idea
generation by evaluative conversation or elaboration, or exposure to instances of ideas too similar to the current
focus of idea generation (Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006). Link (d) represents a predicted positive influence of interaction
on learning, consistent with reported advantages of collaborative learning (e.g., Weinberger et al., 2005).

         From this model, we derive four specific hypotheses that we explore subsequently in an experimental study:
(1) Working    in  pairs will  have a  differential effect on  productivity   and  learning  such   that students  in the  pairs
condition will be less productive in their brainstorming but may still learn more.         (2) Working with the support of
the VIBRANT agent, which provides stimulation in the form of reference to general categories of ideas, will be
more    effective for stimulating  idea production   than  working   with a   human   peer   to the extent   that human   peers

                                                              754                                                     CSCL 2007
primarily provide concrete instances of ideas rather than general categories of ideas (Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006). (3)
Feedback during problem solving supports learning, thus we hypothesize that students working with the VIBRANT
agent will evidence more domain learning than students in the no support conditions (Bangert-Drowns et al., 1991).
(4) Transactive social interaction supports the acquisition of multi-perspective knowledge (Weinberger, 2003), thus
we hypothesize that students in the pairs condition will be more effective at a subsequent idea generation task that
builds on ideas discussed in the first brainstorming task.

     Figure 1. An influence diagram depicting hypothesized causal connections between interventions,
                                        constructs and outcome measures.

Method

Experimental Design
         In  order to  test  our hypotheses,   we  conducted      an  experiment     in  which   students    participated in  a
brainstorming task in an educational context.   The Debris Flow Hazard (DFH) task, which is the brainstorming task
we selected, has been designed by science educators to engage students in scientific inquiry in the area of Earth
sciences  (Chang   &  Tsai,  2005).   The learning   objective    of  this task  is to  make    concepts related   to geology,
agriculture, and urban   development   concrete  for students     as they  grapple  with    the manner   in  which these  very
different types of factors interact in real world scenarios.     However, it is more similar in its cognitive demands to
other idea  generation tasks  used  in studies of group    dynamics    than  typical   collaborative   learning tasks  such  as
mathematics problem solving or collaborative writing.      Thus, the specific properties of this task make it particularly
appropriate for beginning to explore the separate and joint effects of cognitive and social factors on the productivity
and  pedagogical   value  of brainstorming    activities.  We    manipulated     whether    brainstorming    took place   as an
individual or pair activity and whether feedback was offered or not, both as between subjects factors.                Thus, the
experiment was a 2 (individual brainstorming vs. pair brainstorming) X 2 (no system support vs. system support)
factorial design resulting in four experimental conditions, which are referred to in the remainder of the paper as IN
(Individual-No support), IS (Individual-System supported), PN (Pair-No support), and PS (Pair-System supported).

Experimental Infrastructure
         In order to implement the four conditions in a way that maintains maximal consistency across conditions,
we built our experimental infrastructure on top of a well known instant messaging (IM) service over the Internet,
Microsoft  Network's   MSN   messenger    (msn.com).  Due    to   the popularity    of this IM   service with  the target user
population, using an MSN-based client also lessens potential concerns of software difficulty or novelty effects.

         We   adapted  an existing  brainstorming  feedback   agent    called VIBRANT        (Wang   et  al, 2006) to  provide
prompts in response to conversational behavior in the two system supported conditions.            In order to be adapted to a
specific task, VIBRANT must be provided with an idea hierarchy at multiple levels of abstraction. In our domain
idea  hierarchy, the top  node   representing the entire   DFH    task is  first broken   down    into 5 general   topic  areas
including  geology (e.g., shale  rock  area), agriculture  (e.g., having   shallow-rooted    economic    plants which   cannot
solidify the soil mass as much as original forests), influences caused by other natural phenomena (e.g., typhoon and

                                                             755                                                      CSCL 2007
rainstorm which break the hydraulic balance), urban development (e.g., building houses at a potential dangerous
slope), and social factors (e.g., improper environmental policy). Each subtopic is further broken down into specific
idea nodes. A total of 19 specific idea nodes are included. Feedback messages are attached to the nodes of the idea
hierarchy both at the general topic level and the specific idea level.       Similarly, at the specific idea level, prototype
expressions of the related idea collected in previous studies involving the DFH task are attached to idea nodes.            In
this way, student conversational contributions can be matched to nodes in the hierarchy by matching the text of their
contribution to the associated prototype texts using a simple semantic similarity measure.

         The feedback provided by VIBRANT consists of two parts.               The initial portion, which we refer to as the
comment, acknowledges the idea that matched, and how it fits or doesn't fit into the hierarchy.          The second portion,
which   we refer  to  as the tutorial, offers a hint  for thinking   about   a new  contribution.  Feedback messages are
constructed   by concatenating    a selected  comment     with    a selected   tutorial.  For  example,  if the student    has
contributed the idea "deforestation", the system will acknowledge this with the following comment, "Good, you
seem familiar with the effects of excessive urban development."         A next focus for brainstorming, which coherently
follows from this would be more discussion related to urban development, for example "Can you think of a farming
practice motivated by economic concerns that may increase the risk of a debris flow hazard?"                VIBRANT never
offers students specific ideas.    Instead, the hints offered by VIBRANT are more similar to the "category label"
stimuli (such  as "improve    parking"  for   the task of  "how     can your   university  be improved?")   demonstrated    to
enhance idea production in previous studies of group and individual brainstorming (Dugosh et al., 2000; Nijstad &
Stroebe, 2006).   VIBRANT's built in strategy for selecting a next focus was designed to balance breadth and depth
of brainstorming across the idea hierarchy while maintaining the coherence of the conversation.               This design is
motivated  by   prior findings  that   brainstorming   is more    efficient  when  successive   ideas are   clustered so   that
semantically related ideas are contributed in close proximity, and transitions between general idea categories are
relatively rare (Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006).

         For the IS condition, VIBRANT offered feedback in response to each contribution of the student. For the
PS  condition, in order   to give  students time  to  react to each   other's  contributions  before  viewing automatically
generated feedback, the system collected and evaluated the two students' contributions during a fixed period of time,
and then   gave  feedback    based  on the  accumulated     text. This  adjustment  of   the  parameter, length of    time for
collecting dialogues, may be viewed as adjusting how interruptive the computer agent is. In this study, the parameter
was set to 30 seconds, which was observed during a pilot experiment to allow students enough time to interact with
one another.   No feedback from the system was offered to students in the two no support conditions.               Thus, in
contrast to the two support conditions just described, for the IN condition, a simple computer agent did nothing but
simply recorded students' contributions.      Students were simply instructed to use the IM program as a text input
buffer. A similar simple agent was used in the PN condition where pairs of students brainstormed together on the
IM platform but received no system support.

Participants
         The study was conducted in a computer classroom of a public high school located in central Taiwan. Four
sessions were scheduled in the same day, two in the morning and two in the afternoon. In each session, the computer
classroom  accommodated      at most   16   students.  Every   student  worked   at a    computer assigned   to him   or   her.
Participating  students   were  allowed   to  choose   the  session     they attended,    and were   randomly   assigned    to
experimental conditions within that session. For experimental conditions PN and PS, students were paired into dyads
randomly.  The version of the MSN based software used as our experimental infrastructure was configured so that in
the pair conditions, the other student assigned to the same dyad a student appeared in the "buddy list" of that student.
Additionally, in the support conditions, the computer agent that provides feedback also appeared in the "buddy list".
Thus, when the students would launch the application during the experimental manipulation, their MSN based client
would be configured to support a conversation between all of the relevant parties.         Altogether, there were 7 students
in the IN condition, 7 students in IS, 14 students in PN (i.e., 7 pairs), and 14 students in PS (i.e., 7 pairs). During the
study, all students were blind to the experimental design, and unaware of the existence of other conditions.

Experimental Procedure
         The experimental procedure can be divided into five phases, namely (1) background readings, (2) pretest,
(3) brainstorming 1, (4) brainstorming 2, and (5) the post test.        The experimental manipulation took place during
phase (3), which is the first brainstorming phase.     The purpose of the second brainstorming phase is to test whether
the experimental manipulation from phase 3 has an effect on brainstorming behavior that can be detected within a

                                                             756                                                    CSCL 2007
new brainstorming task.    While prior work has evaluated the effect of collaborative idea generation on a subsequent
individual idea generation stage where the idea generation task was the same, to the best of our knowledge this is the
first evaluation in an experimental study of the effect of collaborative idea generation on a subsequent different idea
generation task.   We strictly controlled for time in all phases.

Phase 1. Background Reading (10 minutes)
         During phase 1, the students read a 3 page packet of background reading materials on the climate, geology,
and development of Taiwan as well as some information about natural disasters but no specific information about
debris flow hazards.    This packet was compiled by domain experts working in a science education center at National
Taiwan Normal University.        The readings were  designed   to  offer students a wide range of background   material
related to the topics   contained within the  idea hierarchy discussed    above,  however it did not contain the direct
answers to any questions on the test nor did it directly express the ideas students were required to contribute in the
brainstorming task.   The reading material itself does not explicitly introduce the factors underlying DFH occurrences.
The purpose of the reading materials was to prepare student for the brainstorming task. Students in all conditions
were instructed to read the material for 10 minutes, and to learn as much as possible from the material. The readings
were given to students prior to the pretest so that any learning measured by pre to post-test gains can be attributed to
the brainstorming task and not to the readings alone.  At the end of the 10 minutes, students were asked to turn the
reading materials over and not look at them.   Lab attendants ensured that students followed the instructions.

Phase 2. Pre-brainstorming Test (15 minutes)
         In phase    2, students took an on-line pretest assessing   their conceptual  knowledge  and reasoning  about
debris flow hazards.

Phase 3. Brainstorming Activity 1 (30 minutes)
         After the pretest, the students participated in the first brainstorming phase, which is where the experimental
manipulation took place.    Students were instructed to launch the MSN program and to start working on the DFH
brainstorming task.     Specific instructions for the task appeared as the first prompt in the MSN messenger window.
Students were given a scenario about a specific debris flow hazard and then asked to generate as many thoughts as
possible in answer to the question, "what are the possible factors that may cause a debris flow hazard to happen?"
During this activity, students were invited to use the reading materials from Phase 1 as a resource.   The duration of
the brainstorming session was limited to 30 minutes.

Phase 4.    Brainstorming Activity 2 (10 minutes)
         Upon the completion of the brainstorming task, students regardless of experimental condition were then
instructed to do individual brainstorming on a second brainstorming task. In this idea generation task, students were
requested to offer preventive solutions for DFH. The prompt for this solution-finding brainstorming activity was
"what   facilities or solutions  may  prevent a debris flow  hazard   from  happening?"   No   system support, reading
material or peer interaction was provided when doing this transfer task.       The purpose of this task was to assess
whether the impact of the experimental manipulation had a lasting effect beyond the duration of the manipulation.

Phase 5. Post-brainstorming Test (15 minutes)
         Finally, students took an on-line post-test identical to the one used as a pretest again in order to assess the
influence of the experimental manipulation on learning outcomes. The time allowed for doing the test is also the
same to the pretest phase (for 15 minutes).

Measurement
         Three outcome measures were used and analyzed in this study, including pre to post-test learning gains,
productivity during the initial idea generation task during the experimental manipulation, and productivity in a
subsequent idea generation task.

         We use a 26-item domain test for assessing students' concept comprehension on the DFH topic. The test
itself can conceptually be further decomposed into two parts, factual knowledge recall questions (11 items) and
more reasoning-oriented questions (15 items). The test served as the indicator of students' learning status at the pre-
test and post-test phases. The test was designed by science education researchers for high school students and has

                                                           757                                                 CSCL 2007
been used  in  previous    science  education  studies   (Chang    et al., in   press). The   validity   and   reliability of  this
instrument were discussed and established in prior studies (Chang et al., in press).

         We examined the productivity of idea generation in the first brainstorming activity by using two counting
methods: number of unique ideas contributed by each student and total number of unique ideas produced by groups
as a whole.   The   first task performance   measure   was   the   number    of unique   ideas generated     by  each  individual
student. Students'  brainstorming    contributions   are coded   and   classified   to  one of the    19 ideas   modeled    in  the
aforementioned idea hierarchy. Duplicate ideas are ignored in this analysis. For students who brainstormed with
peers in the PN and PS conditions, we only counted an idea as a unique idea that student contributed if that student
was the one who mentioned it first. The second performance measure we looked at is group-based idea production
which is  standard  to  studies of  group idea  generation   in  the  literature (Diehl  &  Storebe,    1987).   Unlike    the first
measure,  here we   looked  at  the  output of brainstorming    groups    as a  whole   rather than   that  of individual   group
members. For students in the two individual sessions without a human peer (i.e., IS and IN), for a fair comparison,
we formed 7 "nominal" dyads for IN and 7 for IS in a posthoc manner by randomly selecting two individuals from
the same experimental condition (either IS or IN). Ideas generated by group members of nominal dyads were pooled
for the comparison with real groups.

         For  the transfer  task, students  were evaluated    based   on   the  number   of unique    ideas  they were     able to
contribute during the allotted time. Only ideas that matched a list of valid ideas collected during previous studies
using this task counted in the unique idea count.

Results
         Four hypotheses proposed at the beginning were evaluated and examined in the following analyses based
on measures   of  conceptual    learning, performance     in the   main   brainstorming     activity, and   performance     of  the
subsequent idea generation task.

Data Coding
         Logs of all IM behavior in all conditions were saved for analysis.            Altogether we collected 28 logs, 7 in
each condition.   Note    that in the pairs condition,   there  is  only  one   log per  pair rather.    To derive appropriate
quantitative measures of idea generation for analyses, including task performance (number of unique ideas in the
main idea generation task) and transfer performance (number of unique ideas the solution-finding transfer task), data
collected in the main brainstorming phase (i.e., phase 3) and the transfer task phase (i.e., phase 4) have been coded.

         For the main idea generation task, student IM conversation logs were first segmented into idea units, since
during IM conversations, students may contribute more than one idea per turn. The inter-rater reliability between
two independent coders over 10% of the data for sentence segmentation was satisfactory (Kappa= .7). Each unit
contribution was then classified into one of the 19 domain concepts in the aforementioned idea hierarchy. If there
was no feasible label for a particular contribution, the label of "other" was given. The inter-rater reliability for the
concept coding over 10% of the data was also sufficiently high (Kappa=.84). As described previously, the number of
unique ideas generated by each individual and the transformed efficiency measure (number of unique ideas/number
of total unit sentences)   were   both   computed    from this  coding.     For  the   second  brainstorming     task,  students'
responses to were coded according to a coding scheme developed by domain experts based on prior studies.                       The
categories in  that coding  scheme    represent  15  valuable   ideas.   The   inter-rater  reliability  of this coding    of  two
independent coders over 10% of the data was Kappa=.74, which is satisfactory.

         In order to gain insights about the social process of idea generation, the conversation logs were also coded
on the social dimension of knowledge communication. A coding scheme consisting of 11 classes was developed.
There are six valuable classes in the coding scheme which include elaboration (i.e., idea justification or explanation),
comment, positive evaluation, negative evaluation, question (i.e., seeking for explanations), and suggestion. These
valuable  classes   are   considered  as  indicators that    group   members     actively   engaged     in  exchanging     on-task
information, arguing with each other, and co-constructing knowledge collaboratively. We also identified other four
social codes which can be roughly characterized as off-task social interactions, including encouragement, greeting,
acknowledgement,    and   meaningless     utterance. Finally,   for  unit  contributions    which  are   solely  idea  instances
carrying no social mode, we coded them as idea. The inter-rater reliability was acceptable (Kappa=.75).

                                                             758                                                       CSCL 2007
Hypothesis 1: Differential Effect of Social Interaction on Idea Generation and Conceptual
Learning
          The prediction of hypothesis 1 consists of two parts. The first part predicts the presence of productivity loss
in brainstorming groups, and therefore students who worked in pairs should be less productive in idea generation.
The second part predicts that social interaction may promote conceptual learning. Thus, it is expected that students
in the Pairs conditions would gain more knowledge as measured by the domain test.

Hypothesis 1-a: Productivity Loss in Pairs
          Because   production   blocking  is a  well-known    explanation    for  productivity   loss in group    brainstorming
(Diehl   &   Stroebe, 1987),   which  may     effect  both  idea    production  and     learning, we   began   our   analysis by
investigating whether there was evidence of significant production blocking (i.e., having fewer chances to contribute
ideas due to turn-taking) in our data either from the presence of a peer or from the involvement of a computer agent
in the conversation, but we did not find evidence of this.     We first computed an ANOVA with the two independent
factors from our experimental manipulation as the independent variables and total number of student contributions
(i.e., regardless whether   they contain   ideas  or  not)  as the   dependent     variable.  The   ANOVA      did   not show  a
significant effect of the Individual/Pair factor, and in fact the trend was for students in the pairs condition to make
more conversational contributions than students in the individual conditions.            Similarly, not only did we not find
evidence of production blocking due to the presence of a computer agent in the conversation, we found a marginal
main effect in favor of System Support associated with the System-support/No-support factor, F(1, 38)=3.62, p<.1,
with a medium effect size f=.26 (Cohen's f=.25-.40, or equivalently,            Cohen's d= .50-.80) (pp. 286-287, Cohen,
1988) (System Support- Mean: 30.43, S.D.: 15.01; No Support- Mean: 19.95, S.D.: 10.24), demonstrating that the
trend was in the opposite direction of what would be predicted if there were production blocking based on this very
rough measure of production blocking.         Thus,   we  do  not   find  evidence  that the  presence    of  either a  human  or
computer partner for brainstorming reduces the opportunity for students to contribute to the conversation.

          Although    there was  no  evidence    of   production    blocking,   in  the analyses   we   still find   evidence of
productivity loss from the Pairs conditions when we use unique ideas matching one of the 19 ideas selected by
science educators for this task.  The primary ANOVA model was set up by using the first performance measure that
we have mentioned in the following way:

 (A-1) D.V.: Number of Unique Ideas by Each Student, I.V.: Individual/Pairs, System-Support/No-Support

          A significant main effect for Individual/Pair in favor of individual brainstorming was found, F(1,38)=70.94,
p<.001,  Cohen's   f=1.37   is very  large (Individual-   Mean:     9.57, S.D.: 1.91;   Pair- Mean:    4.61,  S.D.:  1.73). With
respect to the other independent factor, the presence of adaptive feedback generated by VIBRANT seemed to have a
trend benefiting the number of unique ideas but did not result in significant difference. No interaction effect was
found. We also looked at the group-based production performance by using the second productivity measure, in
which   we   formed   nominal  groups  for  experimental    conditions    IN and    IS, and  then  pooled    ideas generated  by
nominal group members statistically. By using the group-based measure, a significant main effect on the comparison
of nominal groups versus interacting groups (i.e., real groups, PN and PS conditions) was found, F(1, 24)= 20.7,
p<.001, f= .93, which is still large (Nominal Pair- Mean: 12.36, S.D.:1.55; Real Pair- Mean: 9.21, S.D.:2.12).

Hypothesis 1-b: Learning Outcomes in Pairs
          In connection  with   conceptual    learning,  we   first evaluated   the general   learning  outcomes     in terms of
concept comprehension by computing a repeated measures ANOVA with time point (pre versus post test) as an
independent factor.   From this analysis we determined that there was a main effect of time point with no two-way or
three-way interactions with our experimental manipulation.           F(1,76)= 9.35, p < .005, Cohen's f = .35, which is a
medium to large effect size (Pretest- Mean: 7.41, S.D.: 1.32; Posttest- Mean: 8.14, S.D.: 1.35). Thus, we conclude
that students across conditions learned significantly from pretest to posttest in the brainstorming activity.

          Then we     examined   the effect   of our  experimental    manipulation      on the   magnitude    of learning.    We
hypothesized that because of the benefits of collaborative learning interactions, we would see a learning benefit for
collaborative  idea   generation even  in  the   face of  process   losses with    respect to  productivity   oriented   outcome
measures.    We   did  find  evidence  of   an   increase  in  the  number   of    instances  of  the  types  of conversational
contributions we expected to be associated with learning in the pairs condition based on our analysis of the corpus,

                                                              759                                                       CSCL 2007
especially in the condition   where   the pair            of students interacted  with      the VIBRANT        agent.     In          particular, by
counting the number of valuable social contributions that we have annotated (i.e., the six task-related social codes.),
through an ANOVA analysis, it is determined that students who worked in pairs produced more valuable social
interactions than students who worked individually, F(1, 38)=5.1, p<.05, a medium to large effect size f=.37 (Pair-
Mean: 8.96, S.D.: 9.20; Individual- Mean: 3.36, S.D.: 4.45). There was no main effect of system support and no
interaction effect. Table 1 further shows the average numbers of social contribution per category that occurred per
session in each experimental   condition.    Note            that number   of ideas    in this  table   refers to any    idea          contribution,
whether it was unique or not, and whether it matched one of the 19 pre-specified ideas or not.                          From the top of the
table, it appears that for the two Individual conditions, students narrowly focused on the core idea generation task.
Very few extended explanations or other social interactions were ever uttered. Even in the PN condition the number
of valuable social codes (e.g.., elaboration, comment, positive/negative evaluation, question and suggestion) is still
low, and not significantly different from their occurrence in the Individual conditions. From the comparison between
PN and PS, it is noteworthy that though our system feedback did not explicitly prompt students to engage in social
interactions, such as elaborations, comment and evaluations etc., the current feedback seemed to indirectly trigger
more intense social interaction within the pairs condition.                 Students in the PS condition have significantly more
social contributions than those in other conditions especially in connection with several particular social codes, such
as elaboration, comment and positive/negative evaluation that are associated with transactive collaborative discourse
(Weinberger et al., 2005). The result can be viewed as the evidence that interaction with a collaboration support
agent such as VIBRANT can lead to an increase in transactivity (Weinberger, 2003) in the ensuing collaborative
discourse, however the impact was not great enough to lead to increased learning when comparing IS with PS.

 Table 1. The mean and S.D. of various social contributions per student per session in each experimental
                  condition. Superscripts indicate statistically different levels of occurrence.

                                               IN                        IS               PN                PS

                         Idea                  20.71 (4.96) A            21.00 (5.35) A   11.00 (4.10) B    17.36 (9.88) A B
                         Elaboration*          1.14 (2.19) A B           0B               .64 (1.34) A B    1.36 (1.28) A
                         Comment*              2.43 (3.60) A B           1.29 (2.21) B    2.86 (3.68) B     6.71 (6.50) A
                         Positive Evaluation   0B                        1.86 (2.04) A B  .57 (1.16) B      2.43 (2.53) A
                         Negative Evaluation   0B                        0B               0B                .57 (.76) A
                         Question              0                         0                1.07 (3.25)       .79 (1.37)
                         Suggestion            0                         0                .29 (.61)         .64 (1.45)
                         Acknowledgement       0                         0                .71(1.64)         1.07 (1.54)
                         Greeting              0                         0                0                 .57 (1.16)
                         Encouragement         0                         0                .14 (.53)         .07 (.27)
                         Meaningless           0B                        0B               .5 (1.09) A B     2.00 (2.48) A
                              *Student 's t test, others: Tukey ; Values not labeled with the same letter are significantly different

        We then evaluated whether the increase in occurrence of valuable social contributions in the Pairs condition
were associated with increased learning as measured by pre to post test gains.                         We did this using an ANCOVA
analysis configured as below:

 (A-2) D.V.: Total posttest score, I.V.: Individual/Pairs, System-Support/No-Support, Covariate: Pretest score

        There was a significant main effect of System Support, F(1, 38)=4.57, p<.05, Cohen's f = .35, which is a
medium to large effect. Students in the system-supported conditions achieved significantly higher adjusted posttest
scores (System Support- Mean: 8.61, Std. Err: .20; No Support- Mean: 8.02, Std. Err: .21). A significant main effect
was also found on the factor Individual versus Pair F(1,38)=12.17, p=<.01, effect size Cohen's f=.84, which is a
large effect. Students who brainstormed individually without a peer learned significantly better (Individual- Mean:
8.85, Std. Err: .25; No Support- Mean: 7.78, Std. Err: .17). No statistical interaction effect was found between the
two independent variables.  The ranking of adjusted posttest scores for the four experimental conditions is: IS (Mean:
9.05, Std. Err: .34) > IN (Mean: 8.66, Std. Err: .37) > PS (Mean: 8.12, Std. Err: .24) > PN (Mean: 7.43, Std. Err: .24).
Students learned most in the IS condition, in which VIBRANT adaptive feedback was available, while no peer was

                                                                      760                                                                 CSCL 2007
present. However, only the difference between the two extreme conditions (IS and PN) is significant based on a
Bonferroni post-hoc analysis.    Students who brainstormed with the VIBRANT agent learned significantly more than
students who brainstormed with a peer and no system support.

         Though the phenomenon of productivity loss was observed consistent with hypothesis 1, in connection with
conceptual   learning, a  pattern in  opposition   to hypothesis  1's prediction  was  obtained.  Students   did  not learn
conceptual   knowledge    better  due  to  social  interaction, and  in fact, students  in the  Pairs   conditions learned
significantly less. A further exploration on the relation between idea production and learning outcomes revealed a
correlation between the two measures. By classifying students into two groups according to a median split of their
numbers of unique ideas generated, and using the domain pre-test as the covariate, it was found students with higher
numbers of unique ideas scored significantly higher on the domain post-test, F(1, 39)=9.03, p<.01, a large effect size
Cohen's f=.48. Students with more ideas scored better in the domain test (More productive brainstormer- Mean:
8.66, Std. Err: .23; Less productive brainstormer- Mean: 7.75, Std. Err: .20).

Hypothesis 2: Effect of Categorical Cognitive Stimuli
         Hypothesis 2 predicts that students who brainstormed alone with the VIBRANT agent (i.e., the IS condition)
would be more productive than students working purely in pairs (i.e., the PN condition). The comparison of IS and
PN can be viewed as comparing the how different types of stimuli affect the cognitive process of idea generation.
Both  conditions  had  only   one source  of stimulation, either  carefully designed   stimuli from   a computer   agent or
naturally occurring stimuli from a human peer.        A Bonferroni post-hoc test on a previously introduced ANOVA
model  (A-1)   showed    that there  was  a  significant difference  between   IS  and PN  on   their productivity  during
brainstorming 1 (IS- Mean: 10.14, S.D.: 1.95; PN- Mean: 4.50, S.D: 1.91). While interaction with a human peer
leads to a significant  decrease  in  idea  production,  we do   not see this effect resulting from   interaction  with  the
VIBRANT agent, and in fact the trend is in the opposite direction.      This finding supports hypothesis 2.

Hypothesis 3: Adaptive feedback as Learning Support
         Hypothesis 3 predicts that students would learn domain concepts from the VIBRANT's adaptive feedback
intended as cognitive stimuli for brainstorming.       From the ANCOVA model (A-2) introduced previously, it was
determined   that students learned   significantly better when   adaptive feedback   was   available. No  interaction  with
other variables was found. Hypothesis 3 was supported by this result.

Hypothesis 4: Effect of Social Interaction on Subsequent Idea Generation
         We hypothesized that students who worked in pairs in the main brainstorming task would be more effective
at a subsequent related but different idea generation task.      We first examined the relation between performance in
the subsequent idea generation task and other measures. The number of unique ideas was used as the measure for
this transfer task. No   significant relation was   found  between    measures  of the transfer task    and the main   task.
Nevertheless, by categorizing students into two groups, High/Low reasoning ability in the domain, according to a
median split on their performance on the reasoning-oriented part of the domain test, students with high reasoning
ability in the domain were determined to be more capable in the second idea generation task, F(1, 40)=4.28, p<.05, a
medium to large effect size Cohen's f=.33 (High reasoning- Mean: 5.75, S.D.: 1.89; Low reasoning: Mean: 4.77,
S.D.: 1.11).

         A two way ANOVA was conducted by using the number of unique solutions as the dependent variable,
experimental manipulations as independent variables, and the aforementioned label on High/Low domain reasoning
ability was added into the ANOVA model to account for variance related to that factor. A significant main effect
was found for the Individual/Pair factor, F(1, 37)=7.67, p<.01, a large effect size f=.46. The result was in favor of
working in pairs (Pair- Mean: 5.54, S.D.: 1.58; Individual- Mean: 4.64, S.D.: 1.50). Also, a significant interaction
effect was detected between our two experimentally manipulated factors, F(1, 37)=5.57, p<.05, f=.39, which is close
to a large effect size. PS was found to be the best condition in the transfer task (Mean: 5.79, SD: 1.72), while IS was
the  worst (Mean:   4.00, SD:   1.41). A   post-hoc   pair-wise  Bonferroni analysis showed    that PS  and  PN   both  had
significantly better performance than IS in the transfer task.

         Hypothesis 4 was therefore supported. Students in the Pairs conditions preformed better in a subsequent
idea generation session, in which a related but different task became the target and no external support was available.

                                                             761                                                  CSCL 2007
Conclusions and Current Directions
       We have presented the results of an experimental study investigating both the long term and short term
effects of brainstorming in pairs versus brainstorming individually in an inquiry learning context.   Our finding is that
brainstorming tasks can be beneficial for student learning.  Furthermore, because of a significant correlation between
brainstorming productivity and pre to post test learning in our data, the results support the view that learning from
brainstorming comes from the constructive process of idea generation.        Beyond that, the condition favored by the
results depends upon what outcome measure is valued above the others.      For example, students in the pairs condition
were less productive and learned less during the initial brainstorming task.     On the other hand, the students who
brainstormed in  pairs during  the first session performed     better on the second   brainstorming task. Furthermore,
although brainstorming support had a positive effect on learning both in the individual and pairs conditions, it did
not have a significant positive effect on productivity during the initial brainstorming session.    Nevertheless, since
high reasoning ability students performed better on the second task, we see the learning gains especially related to
the reasoning portion of the pre/post test that resulted from the feedback as providing a potential lasting positive
effect on future brainstorming.   If the relationship between idea generation and learning can be verified to be a
causal one, a brainstorming agent that better supports productivity may also better support learning. Since students
in the pair conditions were observed to have many repetitions and paraphrases of the same ideas, one potential future
agent design might be one that encourages partners to explore different parts of the idea space to avoid producing
redundant ideas, and potentially to avoid process losses due to cognitive interference (c.f., Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006).

This work was funded in part by the National Science Council (NSC), Republic of China grant number NSC 94-
2511-S-003-028 and National Science Foundation grant number SBE0354420.

References
Bangert-Drowns, R., Kulik, C., Kulik, J., & Morgan, M. (1991). The Instructional Effect of Feedback in Test-Like
   Events, Review of Educational Research, 61(2), pp 213-238.
Brown, V.  R., &   Paulus, P.  B. (2002).  Making   group  brainstorming   more  effective:  recommendations    from an
       associative memory perspective. Current Directions in Psychological Science. 11(6), 208-212.
Chang, C.,  &  Weng,   Y.  (2002).  An   exploratory   study on  students'   problem-solving  ability in  earth science.
       International Journal of Science Education, 24(5). 441-451.
Chang C., & Tsai, C. (2005). The interplay between different forms of CAI and students' preferences of learning
       environment in the secondary science class. Science Education, 89, 707-724.
Chang, C., Barufaldi, J. P., Lin, M., Chen, Y. (in press). Assessing tenth-grade students' problem solving ability in
       the area of Earth sciences. Computers in Human Behavior.
Chi, M. H., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., Lavancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding.
       Cognitive Science, 18, 439-488.
Cohen, J.  (1988). Statistical Power    Analysis for   the Behavioral    Sciences,  2nd Ed..  NJ:   Lawrence    Erlbaum
       Associates.
Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in brainstorming groups: toward the solution of a riddle. Journal
       of Personality and Social Psychology. 53(3), 497-509.
Dugosh, K. L., Paulus, P. B., Roland, E. J., & Yang, H. (2000). Cognitive stimulation in brainstorming. Journal of
       Personality and Social Psychology. 79(5), 722-735.
Hill, G. W. (1982). Group versus individual performance: are N+1 heads better than one? Psychological Bulletin,
       91(3), 517-539.
Nijstad, B. A., & Stroebe, W. (2006). How the group affects the mind: a cognitive model of idea generation in
       groups. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 186-213.
Wang,  H., Li, T., Huang,  C., Chang,    C., Rosé,  C. P.  (2006).    VIBRANT:   A   brainstorming  agent for computer
       supported   creative  problem  solving,   Proceedings   of  the  Intelligent Tutoring Systems  Conference   (ITS
       2006).
Weinberger,  A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F.,  &   Mandl, H.  (2005).  Epistemic   and social scripts in computer-supported
       collaborative learning. Instructional Science, 33 (1), 1-30.

                                                           762                                                 CSCL 2007
