        Fading Scripts in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning:
                           The Role of Distributed Monitoring
                               Christof Wecker, Frank Fischer, University of Munich,
                       Department of Psychology, Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 München, Germany
                            Email: christof.wecker@psy.lmu.de, frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de

        Abstract: Computer-based collaboration scripts constitute a form of distributed control and dis-
        burden the learners from the regulation of their performance, which they must internalize in order
        to acquire cognitive skills such as argumentation. Accordingly, without further support, e. g. by
        distributed monitoring by a learning partner, fading may be ineffective. Therefore we examined
        whether fading fosters skill acquisition only in combination with collaborative support. In an expe-
        rimental study with the factors fading and distributed monitoring, learners were supported in an
        online discussion forum by a collaboration script for the production of counterarguments. Results
        show that fading fostered the acquisition of declarative knowledge about argumentation only in
        combination with distributed monitoring, whereas with regard to procedural knowledge about ar-
        gumentation there were no differences. These results indicate that fading supported by aspects of
        computer-supported collaboration can       increase the effectiveness of fading for skill acquisition
        even in early stages of skill acquisition.

Collaboration Scripts as Process-related support in CSCL to foster the
acquisition of cognitive skills
        Forms of process-related support have been developed for computer-supported collaborative learning to in-
duce productive collaborative activities, such as the resolution of socio-cognitive conflict, transactive discussions or
well-grounded argumentation, and thereby increase the acquisition of knowledge and skills (King, in press). One
specific type of process-related support are collaboration scripts (Kollar, Fischer & Hesse, in press; cf. also Kobbe et
al., subm.): Collaboration scripts are directed towards specific goals for learning in the collaborative situation, speci-
fy activities that are functional for these goals, sequence them and assign them to different roles. Furthermore, colla-
boration scripts can be represented differently. These representations may be "internal" as knowledge of the persons
involved in the collaboration (scripts as format for the representation of knowledge, cf. Schank & Abelson, 1977), or
"external", e. g. on prompt cards or as prompts in the graphical user interface of a computer-supported learning envi-
ronment. In the case of external representation collaboration scripts constitute a form of distributed control (cf. Per-
kins, 1993) of collaborative activities (Carmien, Fischer, Fischer, & Kollar, in press): The externally represented
script contains the information necessary to coordinate the collaborative activities of the participants. To conduct
these activities, however, the participants have to rely on their own knowledge on how to perform the activities in-
duced.

        Often, collaboration scripts are not primarily aimed at fostering the acquisition of domain-specific know-
ledge, but at the same time also the acquisition of skilled performance of the collaborative activities shaped by the
script. From the perspective of theories of cognitive skill acquisition, the acquisition of a cognitive skill often de-
parts from a process of problem-solving by using declarative knowledge that is then gradually transformed into pro-
cedural knowledge after repeated performance (VanLehn, 1989). Of this knowledge, one type is required to con-
struct a hierarchy of sub-goals necessary to solve the problem at hand, whereas a second type of knowledge is rela-
ted to how to accomplish the single sub-goals (cf. Anderson, 1987, p. 198). While the knowledge necessary for the
accomplishment of the sub-goals is presupposed by computer-supported scripts that specify activities that are sup-
posed to be mastered by the learners, the second type often is represented in the elements of the interface used to im-
plement the script (e. g. text boxes, prompts, graphical representations of a procedure) to a large extent and needs to
be internalized by the learners to acquire the strategy contained in the script. To be sure, also aspects of declarative
domain-specific knowledge may be represented in scaffolds provided by the interface, but these may be less likely
to negatively affect the acquisition of cognitive skills, as we assume against this theoretical background.

        In the current context, we investigate a skill that is central to CSCL research: the skill of argumentation. In
this study, we particularly focus on one specific aspect of argumentative skills, i. e. the skill to contribute counterar-
guments. In an online-discussion, counterarguments can be contrived by means of a strategy that comprises the fol-
lowing steps: Identifying a claim in a contribution of a learning partner, identifying a corresponding argument, de-

                                                          763                                                 CSCL 2007
termining the type of the claim, determining the type of the argument, checking the conditions required for the argu-
ment to be relevant for the claim (cf. Naess, 1966) and formulating the answer. The learners are supposed to trans-
form this sequence into a cognitive skill.

         Types of claims that frequently occur in problem-based learning in the domain of psychology are, for ex-
ample, diagnoses and recommendations of interventions. What can be regarded as a good argument for or against a
specific claim depends on the type of the claim at issue (cf. Toulmin, 1958). Claim-specific knowledge about argu-
ment schemata is used during skill execution to adapt the following sub-goals in a content-specific manner depen-
ding on the previous processing: For example, after determining the type of a claim one can set the sub-goal to
check whether the argument belongs to one of the argument types that fit the claim type.

Fading of collaboration scripts ­ can the learning partner help?
         It is regarded as important to reduce external support gradually (fading) in order to leave room for self-di-
rected performance of the skills to be acquired (e. g. Pea, 2004; Puntambekar & Hübscher, 2005). The idea of fading
originated from behavioural approaches and has been research intensely in the area of learning disabilities (Dem-
chak, 1990). However, it has also been taken up by cognitively-oriented researchers: A cognitive line of argument
for the necessity of fading for learning claims that also the retrieval of knowledge has to be practiced and therefore
the informational content of prompts needs to be reduced in order to provide the learners with opportunities to prac-
tice the retrieval of knowledge for the regulation of their behaviour (Riley, 1995). In the context of situated approa-
ches, fading is considered in close relationship with scaffolding: Learners are supported in dealing with tasks that
would be too difficult to them without support. By gradually reducing the support, however, they build the necessary
competencies (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1989). In the area of the acquisition of cognitive skills, fading is applied
successfully to learning from worked examples (Renkl & Atkinson, 2003). In this context, in a series of analogously
structured worked examples, more and more steps of the problem-solving process are left out (e. g. Atkinson, Renkl
& Merrill, 2003). A further example from the field of cognitive skills is Leutner's (2000) ,,double-fading support"
approach. Here fading is regarded as an opportunity to learn the "management of mistakes" and takes place on two
levels: On the one hand, the degree of detail in the instructions for the use of a software application is gradually de-
creased, on the other hand, the degree of simplification of the application by the blocking of functions is reduced.
Also in this context fading has proven effective for learning. These studies provide some preliminary support for the
idea that fading may also foster the acquisition of cognitive skills by means of scripts.

         However, approaches to cognitive skill acquisition assume that the acquisition of procedural knowledge is
based mainly on knowledge application during problem-solving (e. g. Anderson, 1982). Furthermore we assume that
the type of knowledge responsible for the control of the execution of the skill is provided by the script, which deli-
vers the sub-goals to the learner in a "ready-made" fashion, and is accordingly taken over by it to a large extent,
Therefore, one would have to expect that the learners will not internalize control knowledge before the fading starts
and fail to control the performance of the skill to be acquired after the fading starts. This may even hold for declara-
tive knowledge underlying the skill, which is assumed to play an important role in early phases of skill acquisition
(Anderson, 1982).

         Therefore the question arises how learners can be supported early in the learning process to take over the
control of their performance. According to the approaches to skill acquisition outlined above, the kind of knowledge
required for this would most likely be acquired if learners were stimulated to use and apply this knowledge them-
selves, i. e. to derive sub-goals themselves independently of the prompts in the script already while the complete
script is still available.

         Interestingly, the role of collaboration in fading and in skill acquisition has rarely been explored. Ideally,
computer-supported collaboration may play a crucial role in fading. One obvious possibility to encourage learners to
derive sub-goals could be monitoring by a learning partner in the sense of distributed metacognition (King, 1998).
Being monitored in one's performance might facilitate to think of the steps to be performed already during the for-
mulation of their contributions in order to avoid negative feedback from their learning partners. An effect of this
kind has already  been     demonstrated for feedback by teaching   persons: In a study    by Vollmeyer and Rheinberg
(2005), the mere expectation of feedback increased the quality of the strategies applied. Moreover, the feedback on
one's own performance is likely to improve performance significantly (Kluger & DeNisi, 1996). In CSCL environ-
ments, there are several interesting possibilities to enhance this process of distributed monitoring. In particular, tech-
nology can support the monitoring partner to access and review specific information about the process of the colla-

                                                            764                                                CSCL 2007
borator's performance. For instance, specific information that makes transparent how a learner proceeded in contri-
ving a critical reply, can be made available to the learning partner. Furthermore, the learning partner can be suppor-
ted by elements in the interface to provide focused feedback on the learners' performance. In addition, monitoring
can be supported by the technology through prompting and hinting with respect to the aspects of the performance
that should be focused on.

       It is the goal of this study to investigate, how fading of collaboration scripts affects the acquisition of a cog-
nitive skill, and to what extent computer-supported collaboration ­ implemented in the form of distributed monito-
ring­ would mediate these effects.

Research questions
       The research questions of this study were the following:

       (1) Do the fading of scripts and distributed monitoring interact with respect to the acquisition of declarative
knowledge underlying a cognitive skill?

       (2) Do the fading of scripts and distributed monitoring interact with respect to the acquisition of procedural
knowledge underlying a cognitive skill?

       It was expected that the acquisition of the both the declarative and the procedural knowledge underlying a
skill is fostered by fading only in combination with distributed monitoring.

Method

Participants and design
       The participants of the study were 120 students in courses in educational science and teacher preparation
who attended a lecture with the title "introduction to educational psychology". They were randomly grouped in dy-
ads who discussed on separated online discussion boards during the collaborative learning phase.

       A 2x2 design with the factors fading and distributed monitoring was implemented (see table 1).

      Table 1: Design of the study.

                                                    Fading
                                                    No                                Yes
Distributed                 No                      12 dyads                          18 dyads
monitoring                  Yes                     13 dyads                          17 dyads

Learning environment and material
       The two learners in each group dealt with cases on the application of Weiner's attribution theory in a text-
based online discussion board (described, e. g., in Weinberger, 2003). They were told that they were discussing ana-
lyses of these cases in groups of four and that two of the other learners had the task to write these analyses. The lear-
ners themselves were asked to write critical replies to each of theses analyses and could discuss online any questions
that came up during this task. In fact, six case analyses that were developed on the basis of authentic material from
earlier studies with at least two questionable claims in each were posted to the board under the names of the two
would-be group members at fixed points in time. As a preparation for this cooperative learning session, the learners
read a three-page text on Weiner's attribution theory and a four-page text on how to construct counterarguments in
the critical replies.

       The script supported the learners in the process of formulating counterarguments against the prepared case
analyses by providing instructions on how to analyze the argumentation in the case analyses and to discover proble-

                                                           765                                                CSCL 2007
matic assumptions. It was implemented in the interface (cf. figure 1), which contained three kinds of script-related
information: sequence information, argument schemata and application support. In the upper left-hand corner, the
case analysis to be criticized was displayed.

            Figure 1. Implementation of the script in the interface of the online discussion board
                                                       Important terms:
        "These" ­ claim, "Typ der These" ­ type of claim,          "Typ des Arguments" ­ type of argument,
       "Relevanzbedingung" ­ condition required for the argument to be relevant for the claim,
                           "Gegenargument" - counterargument

       Sequence information described the process of analyzing the argumentation in the prepared case analysis
and the construction of a critical reply to it. It specified the next step in the sequence already mentioned: Identifying
a claim in a contribution of a learning partner, identifying a corresponding argument, determining the type of the
claim, determining the type of the argument, checking the conditions required for the argument to be relevant for the
claim, and formulating the answer. Sequence information was implemented in the interface as prompts that changed
according to the state of the editing. These prompts were displayed in darkly coloured areas that highlighted the in-
terface element in which the step should be performed, as shown in figure 1 for the step of checking the conditions
required for the argument to be relevant for the claim

       Argument schemata contained information on what types of argument are appropriate to support the identi-
fied type of claim and what conditions of relevance need to be fulfilled for an identified pair of argument and claim,
which was crucial for the assessment of the argumentation in the case analysis. These schemata were implemented
by means of selection fields for the type of the claim and the argument, which constitute the second row of boxes in
figure1, as well as by a prompt for the assessment of the condition of relevance, displayed above the highlighted box
for the assessment of the conditions required for the argument to be relevant for the claim in figure 1. The options in

                                                          766                                                CSCL 2007
the field for the argument type was adapted according to the type of claim selected in the corresponding selection
field, and so were the prompts for the assessment of the conditions of relevance according to the type of argument
selected in the corresponding selection field. Accordingly, the specific content of script support branched depending
on the selections made by the students on earlier steps.

       Application support was provided by explanatory sentences for the terms used in the prompts and selection
fields of the script as well as examples for the respective types of propositions (in accordance with the text on how
to construct counterarguments in the critical replies). They were shown in the interface directly next to the respec-
tive control elements in lightly colourd text areas, as shown to the left of the box for the assessment of the conditions
of relevance in figure 1.

       At the bottom, the interface contained a textbox for editing the message, which was pre-composed based on
selection and inputs made on earlier steps, as shown at the bottom of figure 1.

Operationalization of the independent variables

Fading.
       As the specific content of the script support branches depending on the identified types of claim and argu-
ment, the elements of the script could be faded only after the learners could be expected to have selected the respec-
tive branch at least one time. Based on the design of the prepared case analyses, this could be expected after the pos-
ting of two contributions. For the branching of the specific content of the script support, unequivocal input was re-
quired. Accordingly, the interface elements corresponding to earlier steps of the script (e. g. the selection box for the
classification of the claim) could not be faded befor the interface elements corresponding to the later steps of the
script (especially the prompts aimed to support the checking of the conditions required for the argument to be rele-
vant for the claim). The fading conforme dot the following schedules for the three kinds of information contained in
the script:

       The application support, i. e. the explanatory sentences designed to clarify the terms used in the prompts
and selection fields of the script as well as examples for the respective types of propositions, disappeared completely
after the second critical reply a learner posted with support of the script.

       The sequence information prompts were faded in the following way: Ater the second critical reply posted
with support of the script, two randomly chosen prompts for the next step were replaced by an unspecific prompt in
each round. This unspecific prompt read as follows: "Please perform this step on your own." This entails, that after
five critical replies posted with support of the script only this unspecific request was shown before each step.

       The argument schemata were gradually reduced in a "backward" fashion after the second critical reply a
learner posted with support of the script: On the third occasion, in which the learners constructed a critical reply a
learner with support of the script, the specific question concerning the fulfilment of the condition of relevance (step
5) was replaced by an unspecific one. Starting with the fourth occasion, the selection field for the type of the argu-
ment did no longer contain any options, but the learners had to fill in the type of the argument themselves. Starting
with the fifth critical reply constructed with support of the script, the selection field for the type of the claim did no
longer contain any options, but the learners had to fill in the type of the claim themselves. After 70 minutes, finally
the students were provided only with a simple text box for the formulation of their critical replies to the case analy-
ses as customary in asynchronous discussion boards.

Distributed monitoring.
       In the conditions with distributed monitoring, one of the learning partners had the task to provide the other
learner with feedback for each of his or her critical replies to the case analyses, based on which the other learner was
asked to revise his critical reply. During the formulation of the feedback, the learning partner was supported by the
interface: By simply clicking on check boxes, feedback on the completeness of the six steps of the sequence for the
construction of a counterargument, on the appropriateness of the identification of the types of claim and argument,
and on the correctness of the answer to the question concerning the condition of relevance could be given. Further-
more there was the opportunity to add free text remarks. The distributed monitoring was continued after the start of
the fading, i. e. the learners in these conditions were continuously provided with feedback on their procedure during
the formulation of critical remarks.

                                                          767                                                  CSCL 2007
Procedure
       The collection of data was conducted in a series of sessions of three hours of length with 20 students each.
These were distributed over two rooms in such a way that the learning partners who collaborated online sat in diffe-
rent rooms. After a short introduction into the purpose and procedure of the study, the participants filled in an online
questionnaire (5 min) and read the texts on attribution theory (8 min). Then they were asked to write critical remarks
against an attribution-theory-based analysis of a case from educational practice (10 min). After that, they read a text
on how to construct counterarguments (12 min), which was printed on worksheets they could keep until the end of
the learning phase. The collaborative learning phase started with an introduction and a demo video on how to use the
learning environment (11 min). After a short break, the collaboration phase in the different experimental conditions
followed (80 min). Finally, online post-tests for declarative and procedural knowledge about the construction of
counterarguments as well as several control-measures were administered (40 min).

Dependent variables and instruments
       The test for declarative knowledge about the construction of counterarguments asked for information given
in the text on how to construct counterarguments and in the script (e. g. "Please enumerate the steps necessary to
produce a counterargument."). The free answers were coded according to mentions of the steps of the script (see
above). The number of correctly remembered elements was used as the test score.

For the measurement of procedural knowledge about the construction of counterarguments, the learners were indivi-
dually given a case analysis as during the collaborative learning phase and had the task to produce as many coun-
terarguments against it as possible. Then, with respect to one of the counterarguments that were possible in the reply
to the case analysis, they were asked for the results of the single cognitive operations regarded as necessary to con-
trive this counterargument (e. g. "Please identify the type of the following sentence: `Therefore, also in the forced
course of bioinformatics she will not be motivated much.'"). These five items were intended to measure independent
procedural knowledge components underlying the cognitive       skill to produce counterarguments.      Accordingly, it
should not be possible to aggregate them to form one internally consistent scale. Rather, they should be included as
distinct indicators of procedural knowledge about the construction of counterarguents in multivariate analyses.

Results

Research question 1: Interaction between fading and distributed monitoring with respect
to the acquisition of declarative knowledge underlying a cognitive skill
       The results for research question 1 concerning the interaction between fading and distributed monitoring
with respect to the acquisition of declarative knowledge underlying a cognitive skill are presented in figure 2. The x-
axis displays the two values of the fading factor, while the separate lines in the graph represent the distributed moni-
toring factor. On the y-axis, the score in the test for declarative knowledge about argumentation that asked for a de-
scription of the six steps involved in contriving a counterargument is displayed. Scores could range from zero to six.
As we had hypothesized, the learners in the condition with both fading and distributed monitoring outperformed
those in the group with fading only. Learners in the condition with fading only scored higher than the groups with-
out fading and distributed monitoring and without fading and without distributed monitoring. The interaction bet-
ween fading and distributed monitoring was significant (F(3; 56) = 6.80; p < 0.01; 2 = 0.267). We further tested,
whether the group with both fading and distributed monitoring demonstrated more declarative knowledge underly-
ing the skill in the post-test than the three other groups. As the prerequisites for parametric tests were not fulfilled, a
Mann-Whitney U test was applied. The difference between the learners in the combination condition and the lear-
ners in the other three conditions turned out to be significant (U = 162.5; Z = -3.60; p < 0.001).

Research question 2: Interaction between fading and distributed monitoring with respect
to the acquisition of procedural knowledge underlying a cognitive skill
       With respect to the procedural knowledge underlying a cognitive skill, the items measuring the occurrence
of the single cognitive operations hypothesized to underlie the skill turned out to be independent from each other as
intended. This means that, as intended, they did not constitute an internally consistent scale. Accordingly, they were
used as separate indicators of procedural knowledge about argumentation in a multivariate analysis of variance. This
analysis showed that there were no significant differences between any of the experimental conditions with respect
to procedural knowledge about argumentation (Hotelling's Trace: F(15; 149) = 0.388; n. s.; 2 = 0.038).

                                                         768                                                   CSCL 2007
 Declarative knowledge about
                             argumentation
                                           6

                                           5

                                           4
                                                                                                                               Distributed
                                                                                                                               monitoring:
                                           3                                                                                     no         yes

                                           2

                                           1

                                           0
                                                                 no                                        yes
                                                                                    Fading
                                                    Figure 2: Declarative knowledge about argumentation in the four conditions

Discussion
                                           With respect to the declarative knowledge underlying the cognitive skill of producing counterarguments,
the results of this study confirmed our expectation that fading fosters learning only in combination with additional
support such as distributed monitoring. Here computer-supported collaborative learning can add to the effectiveness
of skill acquisition by coordinating the distribution of metacognitive aspects relevant for the internalization of know-
ledge embodied in a script. In particular, learners may receive support for taking over the control of their activities
early in the learning process through collaboration that is facilitated by computer support.

                                           With respect to the procedural knowledge underlying    the cognitive skill, the corresponding hypothesis
could not be confirmed. This negative finding could be possibly explained by the duration of the learning phase that
might have not allowed most learners to enter the stage of skill acquisition in which declarative knowledge becomes
proceduralized (Anderson, 1982). However, contrary to assumptions in the fading literature according to which fa-
ding should be most effective in later phases of skill acquisition (e. g. Renkl & Atkinson, 2003), our findings indi-
cate that, under certain conditions, fading can bring advantages already in early stages of skill acquisition. These
conditions include additional support for learners to take over the control of the performance of the skill to be acqui-
red while the entire script is still available. Thereby it could be demonstrated that collaboration, in particular distri-
buting aspects of metacognition such as monitoring among learners, can play an important role in helping learners to
take over the self-regulation of their behaviour while support is gradually decreased. In some cases at least, merely
reducing the support does not seem to be enough.

                                           At least one further explanation for the negative result concerning procedural knowledge is possible: The
students in the condition with both fading and distributed monitoring might have learned what to do and when to do
it without having learned how and why to do it (cf. Brown, 1978; Veenman, Van Hout-Wolters & Afflerbach, 2006).
This touches on two issues:

                                           On the one hand, the script may have provided the learners with a strategy the components of which are not
in the repertoire of the learners. So the failure of the students in the conditon with both fading and distributed moni-
toring to perform according to their declarative knowledge (i. e. demonstrate the corresponding procedural know-

                                                                                          769                                                CSCL 2007
ledge) may be a result of a lack of lower-level procedural knowledge, e. g. on how to check the conditions required
for the argument to be relevant for the claim. Information about how to achieve this was provided in the introductory
text on how to construct counterarguments as well as in the script, but it may not have been proceduralized in the
course of the collaborative learning phase. Accordingly, higher-level procedural knowledge could not have been de-
monstrated in the post-test.

       On the other hand, the learners may have failed to acknowledge the usefulness of the strategy contained in
the script compared to their own prior argumentative competencies. For example, they may regard the skill to pro-
duce counterarguments as unimportant or the strategy itself as not helpful, believe that they will have resources si-
milar to the script available when they will have to produce counterarguments in the future, or be rather confident in
their own argumentative competencies. Each of these beliefs might lower the willingness to go beyond the acquisi-
tion of declarative knowledge underlying the skill to produce counterarguments.

       Further analyses of the processes of learning and collaboration are required, both for providing a more de-
tailed description of the learning processes that lead to differences in the acquisition of declarative knowledge and
for deciding between the explanations offered for the absence of differences with respect to the acquisition of proce-
dural knowledge. In order to establish whether failures in acquiring procedural knowledge are due to the unavailabi-
lity of the operations that make up the strategy contained in the script, these analyses should focus on whether the
learners' activities while they are guided by the script correspond to what was intended by the design of the script. In
order to assess whether distributed monitoring functions in the way hypothesized, the learners' performance on steps
that are no longer specifically prompted in the process of fading needs to be evaluated according to its correspon-
dence with the strategy from the script. Furthermore, as studies show that these competencies develop over longer
periods of time, (Kuhn, Shaw & Felton, 1997) the investigation of the acquisition of argumentative competencies
supported by scripts and their fading should also be stretched in time to capture growth that occurs more slowly.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of Cognitive Skill. Psychological Review, 89, 369-406.
Anderson, J. R. (1987). Skill Acquisition: Compilation of Weak-Method Problem Solutions. Psychological Review,
       94, 192-210.
Brown, A. L. (1978). Knowing When, Where, and How to Remember: A Problem of Metacognition. In R. Glaser
       (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychology. Volume 1 (pp. 77-165). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erl-
       baum Associates, Publishers.
Atkinson, R. K., Renkl, A. & Merrill, M. M. (2003). Transitioning From Studying Examples to Solving Problems:
       Effects of Self-Explanation Prompts and Fading Worked-Out Steps. Journal of Educational Psychology,
       95, 774-783.
Carmien, S., Fischer, F., Fischer, G. & Kollar, I. (2007). The interplay of internal and external scripts - a distributed
       cognition perspective. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl, & J. Haake (Eds.), Scripting Computer Supported
       Communication     of   Knowledge: Cognitive, Computational    and Educational Perspectives  (pp.    303-326).
       New York: Springer.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S. & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the Crafts of Reading, Wri-
       ting, and Mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, Learning, and Instruction: Essays in Honor of Ro-
       bert Glaser  (pp.  453-494).  Hillsdale/New  Jersey,   Hove, London: Lawrence  Erlbaum   Associates,  Publi-
       shers.
Demchak, M. (1990). Response Prompting and Fading Methods: A Review. American Journal on Mental Retarda-
       tion, 94, 603-615.
King, A. (1998). Transactive Peer Tutoring: Distributing Cognition and Metacognition. Educational Psychology Re-
       view, 10, 57-74.
King, A. (2007). Scripting collaborative learning processes: A cognitive perspective. In F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H.
       Mandl, &  J. Haake (Eds.), Scripting Computer Supported Communication of Knowledge: Cognitive, Com-
       putational and Educational Perspectives (pp. 13-37). New York: Springer.
Kluger, A. N. & DeNisi, A. (1996). The Effects of Feedback Interventions on Performance: A Historical Review, a
       Meta-Analysis, and a Preliminary Feedback Intervention Theory. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 254-284.
Kobbe, L., Weinberger, A. & Fischer, F. (subm.). Framework for the specification of collaboration scripts.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F. & Hesse, F. W. (2006). Collaboration Scripts - A Conceptual Analysis. Educational Psycholo-
       gy Review, 18, 159-185
Kuhn, D., Shaw, V. & Felton, M. (1997). Effects of dyadic interaction on argumentative reasoning. Cognition and

                                                          770                                               CSCL 2007
       Instruction, 15, 287-315.
Leutner, D. (2000). Double-fading support - a training approach to complex software systems. Journal of Computer
       Assisted Learning, 16, 347-357.
Naess, A. (1966). Communication and Argument: Elements of Applied Semantics. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
Pea, R. D. (2004). The Social and Technological Dimensions of Scaffolding and Related Theoretical Concepts for
       Learning, Education, and Human Activity. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 423-451.
Perkins, D. N. (1993). Person-plus: a distributed view of thinking and learning. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
       cognitions: Psychological  and  educational  considerations   (pp. 88-110). Cambridge,  New York,  Mel-
       bourne: Cambridge University Press.
Puntambekar, S. & Hübscher, R. (2005). Tools for Scaffolding Students in a Complex Learning Environment: What
       Have We Gained and What Have We Missed? Educational Psychologist, 40, 1-12.
Renkl, A. & Atkinson, R. K. (2003). Structuring the Transition From Example Study Problem Solving in Cognitive
       Skill Acquisition: A Cognitive Load Perspective. Educational Psychologist, 38, 15-22.
Riley, G. A. (1995). Guidelines for Devising a Hierarchy When Fading Response Prompts. Education and Training
       in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 30, 231-242.
Schank, R. C. & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human Know-
       ledge Structures. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Toulmin, S. E. (1958). The Uses of Argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
VanLehn, K. (1989). Problem Solving and Cognitive Skill Acquisition. In M. I. Posner (Ed.), Foundations of cogni-
       tive science (pp. 527-579). Cambridge, Massachusetts u. London, England: The MIT Press.
Veenman, M. V. J., Hout-Wolters, B. H. A. Van & Afflerbach, P. (2006). Metacognition and learning: conceptual
       and methodological considerations. Metacognition and Learning, 1, 3-14.
Vollmeyer, R. & Rheinberg, F. (2005). A surprising effect of feedback on learning. Learning and Instruction, 15,
       589-602.
Weinberger, A. (2003). Scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. Effects of social and epistemic coo-
       peration scripts on collaborative knowledge construction. Doctoral dissertation at the Ludwig-Maximilians-
       Universität Munich. URL:    http://edoc. ub. uni-muenchen.    de/archive/00001120/01/Weinberger_Armin.
       pdf.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper was funded in the context of the Virtual Graduate School "Knowledge acquisi-
tion and knowledge exchange with new media" by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

                                                         771                                               CSCL 2007
