                 Coordination Dynamics in CSCL based Chat Logs

                     Miriam Weinel, Peter Reimann, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia,
                          Email: m.weinel@edfac.usyd.edu.au, p.reimann@edfac.usyd.edu.au

          Abstract:  This   paper  describes  coordination     dynamics   in  computer    supported   collaborative
          learning (CSCL)   based    chat  logs. We   developed  a   coding  scheme   for  coordination   processes
          containing 25 different coding categories, and used it to analyze chat data gathered in a semester-
          long education course. In general, we found a high level of coordination throughout the chat logs.
          The  level of   goal-related coordination   (goal-related   vs. not   goal-related)  varied  extensively,
          depending on the specific task type. Based on an initial process analysis, a time pattern with regard
          to coordination levels was identified. We surmised that the amount of goal-related coordination
          and the point in time in which it occurs might play a role in coordination behavior. However,
          strong intra- and interindividual differences prevented us from detecting a distinct coordination
          pattern by numerical means over time. We conclude by proposing an extension of our analysis
          across media type and task type to detect coordination patterns relevant for collaborative learning.

Introduction
          For collaboration to occur, coordination has to take place (Barron, 2000). Although coordination processes
have been primarily analyzed in work teams, they also play an important role in learning groups, particularly in
situations where groups both work together over longer stretches of time without being micromanaged, and work on
tasks that require a division of labor. Malone and Crowston (1990) describe coordination as "the act of managing
interdependencies between activities performed to achieve a goal" (p. 361) and identify different components of
coordination: Two or more actors have to be involved in goal-directed activities. These activities are characterized
by interdependencies. Such interdependencies can be common objects such as plans and diagrams, which are part of
two  or more  activities,  time as a constraining   factor  or the  outcome  of   one activity that is required  for  another
activity. Espinosa,  Lerch  and  Kraut  (2004)   conclude   that some   interdependencies    might  be    more  important  for
successful performance than others. Groups have to be good at coordinating and managing the interdependencies
that are crucial for the success of their particular task.

          Most of the coordination literature has focused on face-to-face groups (Espinosa et al., 2004). However,
collaboration in computer-supported groups occurs in a different setting and thus the nature of coordination must
change.   Another  important  factor   for coordination    processes is the  task itself. Each   task type  goes along  with
specific coordination patterns. Arrow, McGrath and Berdahl (2000) stress the fact that behaviour of groups change
over time   Therefore,  in order to  illuminate  coordination   patterns  in typical  learning   settings and  their temporal
patterns, we adopted an exploratory approach.

Educational Setting
          This study examines the experience of seven participants in a postgraduate course in education during the
course  of  a semester.   The   course was   taught in  a   blended  mode    with  8  online  and  5  face-to-face   sessions.
Participants' age ranges between 23 and 45 years, with an average of 31 (4 female, 3 male). Students formed two
different groups   with 3-4  members    each.    During the  online  sessions,  groups    collaborated through   the  content
management system Plone®. Interaction between participants mostly took place in a synchronous chat environment
developed   within  the CoCo    Research   Centre,  University   of  Sydney  (Ullman,     Peters &  Reimann,    2005),  to be
demonstrated at the conference. Students also used an asynchronous discussion board to some, albeit minor, extent.

          Tasks were composed of the collaborative creation of Wiki pages, concept maps and joint group papers as
well as the discussion and feedback to other group members' contributions to the online space. The tasks allowed for
some degree of freedom as they typically asked for the collaborative production of an artifact, e.g. a concept map,
but left coordination and collaboration means to the group to determine.

Coding Scheme for Coordination
          Malone and Crowston's (1990) coordination theory guided us in the development of the coding scheme's
categories. They   distinguish  four coordination   processes:   identification of goals,  mapping    of  goals to   activities,
selection  of  actors/assignment   of  activities  to actors   and   management      of   interdependencies.   The   category

                                                             772                                                     CSCL 2007
`interdependencies'   consists  of   five subcategories,  such  as  addressing  communication    means,    establishing
simultaneity, negotiating    shared resources and dealing  with prerequisites. First codings revealed that in order to
match existing chat log data better we added the category `establishing shared meaning' (see Table 1).

         An important part of coordination behavior is the response from the communication partner. In order to
indicate closure of an action, we introduced two additional codes per category and subcategory, respectively: A plus
(`+') indicates acceptance, elaboration, clarification or reassurance as a reaction to an initiation behavior. A minus
(`-`) indicates  rejection or disagreement.   Closure  was only  coded if an   utterance was  a  direct response to a
coordination action.
Table 1: Overview of the coordination coding scheme.
(Sub-) Category            Definition                                  Examples
Goals (+/-)                ·  Identifying goals.                       "Overall, what do we need to do?"
Activities (+/-)           ·  Mapping goals to activities.             "This is the to do list."
Actors (+/-)               ·  Assigning activities to group            "I would like to see Ralph put the doc
                              members.                                 together as a Wiki."
Interdependencies:         Management of interdependencies
 Communication             ·  Media usage for coordination            "Should we meet face-to-face to discuss
 means (+/-)                  purpose.                                this?"
 Simultaneity (+/-)        ·  Synchronizing activities.                "Have you all read my notes?"
 Shared resource (+/-) ·      Allocating/discussing resources.         "Who is in our group for this task?"
 Prerequisite (+/-)        ·  Ordering/demanding activities.           "Suggest other options."
 Shared meaning(+/-)       ·  Trying to establish a shared mental      "I am not sure, if I understand correctly."
                              model.
Non Coordination           ·  Entries not related to coordination.

         Semantic units served as units of analysis. Two raters used the scheme for initial coding. A first interrater
agreement was estimated and the coding scheme underwent various revision cycles. The second rater coded about
50% of the existing data. The Kappa measure (=.77) for interrater reliability resulted in a satisfactory agreement.

Initial Results
         The coding phase resulted in approximately 5800 coded events for 12 chat logs. We established a timeline
for each of the two groups. The timeline for group A consists of 3500 events and the timeline for group B of 2300
events. This difference is due to the fact that group A felt more comfortable with the medium and chose to conduct
additional voluntary chat sessions. Meanwhile, group B members decided to meet face-to-face.

         With a few exceptions, the coordination process frequency per chat sessions was between 40% and 56%.
Differences between the two groups can be noted. Group A showed an average of 42% coordination behavior in
their chat logs and group B an average of 37%. Analysis of coordination frequency with regard to meaningful task
units (a task unit combines all the chat logs regarding a particular task) revealed similar coordination patterns with
only minor deviations across different task units. Even though both groups showed about the same amount of non-
coordination behavior (59.7% group A and 62.5% for group B), group A showed more goal-related coordination
(goal identification and goal mapping). About 0.9% of all utterances for group A were related to goal identification
versus 0.4% for group B and 1.4% of all utterances for group A were related to goal mapping versus 0.3% for group
B. An event log analysis, which plotted coded events along a timeline, revealed that group A performed goal-related
coordination actions such as goal identification and goal mapping throughout the entire chat session whereas group
B predominantly performed them during the second half of the sessions if at all. Although the overall amount of
goal-related coordination differed between the two groups, they showed roughly the same pattern of goal-related
coordination usage across the different task types (Figure 1).

         In  general, more   initiations than closures were uttered (513  initiations versus 287 closures). Group   A
showed a convergent initiation­closure behavior pattern, more initiated actions were responded to by closures the

                                                           773                                                CSCL 2007
longer the course lasted. Group B showed a divergent pattern, where an increase in initiation was accompanied by a
decrease in closure. The more group members initiated the less they responded to their actions.
