              Interdisciplinarity in the CSCL Community ­
                                           an Empirical Study

              Martin Wessner, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, Germany,
                                          martin.wessner@psy.lmu.de
 Andrea Kienle, Fraunhofer IPSI, Darmstadt, Germany, andrea.kienle@ipsi.fraunhofer.de

      Abstract.    In   previous   work    the CSCL    community        was  analysed   with    respect  to its  scope,
      development, continuity and connectivity (Hoadley 2005, Kienle & Wessner 2005, Kienle & Wessner
      2006). Main insights included a relatively low but stable continuity of individuals in the community,
      increasing     international  participation   and    increasing   connectivity    across   different   countries.
      Concerning the disciplines involved in CSCL and the disciplinary backgrounds of CSCL community
      members     it was  found  that  a  variety of disciplines    are represented  in the  community.     A    detailed
      analysis  of   the way  these disciplines   contribute  to the    progress of  CSCL,   the  way    members   with
      different disciplinary backgrounds collaborate is still missing. In this paper we report an analysis of
      the CSCL community with respect to the disciplinary background of its members and the interrelation
      of   various disciplines  in CSCL.     The  analysis is based    on a  survey  among   members     of the  CSCL
      community      actively involved    in  the CSCL    2007   conference     (reviewers  and  authors  of  accepted
      contributions).    The  paper    reports and   discusses   main   results  of  this   analysis with   respect   to
      disciplinary background of CSCL community members as well as links between the disciplines. In
      addition it provides insights into motives for interdisciplinary collaboration, beneficial and hindering
      factors. The results should help to sharpen our view of the CSCL community, contribute to a shared
      understanding     about what  CSCL      (currently) is (and   what  is it not) and   point out perspectives     for
      future development of the CSCL community.

      Keywords: CSCL community, community analysis, interdisciplinarity.

Introduction
        The CSCL community has an ongoing task in developing a common theory that integrates the foundations
of the relevant disciplines (Stahl, 2002; Puntambekar & Young, 2003). At CSCL conferences (e.g. 2003 in Bergen,
Norway) lively discussions occur about the nature of the CSCL community and the identity of this field. In order to
provide a  more   objective   picture, the CSCL    community     was    analysed  with  respect  to  its scope,  development,
continuity and connectivity     (Hoadley   2005,  Kienle   &  Wessner     2005,  Kienle   &  Wessner     2006).  Main  insights
included a stable continuity of individuals in the community, increasing international participation and increasing
connectivity across different countries (data is available at www.cscl-community.org). Concerning the disciplines
involved in CSCL and the disciplinary backgrounds of CSCL community members it was found that a variety of
disciplines are represented in the community: While Hoadley (2005) found out that the majority of authors have a
departmental affiliation in education, he counted authors with affiliations in nine more disciplines (plus 47 authors
working in "other" disciplines). To cope also with authors working in "outlandish" departments, e.g. a psychologist
working in a computer science department, and thus learn more about the collaboration between disciplines in the
community   on a   daily work   level, a  more  detailed  analysis  is  needed.  How   do   the disciplines contribute     to the
progress of CSCL? How do people with different disciplinary backgrounds collaborate in the field?

        CSCL    has   been  labelled   as  multidisciplinary  (i.e. multiple    disciplines work  in  a  field   side by   side),
pluridisciplinary (i.e. multidisciplinary plus comparision of methodologies and results), and interdisciplinary (i.e.
multidisciplinary  plus  synthesis of  methodologies    and   results)  (see for example    Klein 1990).    While    often these
terms are used interchangeably, it is an important question for the CSCL community whether it is composed of
relatively independent, monodisciplinary sub fields or whether there is true interdisciplinary collaboration. We do
not elaborate further    on the benefits   of  interdisciplinary work   here.   Hoadley   (2005)  argues    that all  drivers  of
interdisciplinary research apply to CSCL as its research topic is complex, not confined to one discipline, addresses a

                                                             775                                                      CSCL 2007
societal problem   and  is affected  by  new   technologies. In   their  qualitative  study Kienle    and Wessner    (2006)
identified complementary competences and skills as one driving factor also for international collaboration in CSCL.

         In this paper we want to provide answers to these questions about interdisciplinarity based on an analysis
of the CSCL community focussing on disciplines and collaboration between members with different disciplinary
backgrounds. Our hypotheses with respect to collaboration between disciplines are:

   1.    There  is substantial interdisciplinary collaboration    in the CSCL     community   as  it can  be seen from  the
         research groups community members belong to and from the co-authorship of community artefacts.
   2.    There  is   a  correlation  between     previous    experience     with   interdisciplinary   work   and    current
         interdisciplinary  collaboration    "behaviour"  (i.e. if   one   has  good   experience    with interdisciplinary
         collaboration chances are higher that he or she writes papers with interdisciplinary co-authorship).

         In addition to  evaluating  these   hypotheses empirically,   we  are  interested in the  motives,  beneficial and
hindering factors for interdisciplinary work in CSCL.

         In the following   section we  describe  the  methods    and  data used   in our  analysis. Then  we  present  and
discuss the main results concerning our research questions and previous work. Finally, we conclude the paper with
implications for the further development of the CSCL community.

Methods and Data
         Our analysis is based on data gathered via an email survey among all reviewers and authors of accepted
contributions of the CSCL 2007 conference.

         The conference organisation of CSCL 2007 provided us with names, email addresses and affiliations for
reviewers and contact authors. In addition we got titles and the lists of co-authors for all contributions (i.e. paper,
poster etc.). Due to privacy reasons data on papers and authors was limited to papers which have been accepted for
presentation at the conference and their authors. From the lists of reviewers and authors we generated two lists of
CSCL   community    members:   A  first list ("only-reviewers")   contains  all  reviewers  who  did  not serve as   contact
authors of accepted contributions to CSCL 2007. A second list ("contact authors") contains all contact authors of
accepted contributions also including contact authors who serve as reviewers.

         For each  group   a questionnaire   was designed   in  order  to  learn  about interdisciplinary collaboration  in
general and wrt. accepted contributions to the CSCL 2007 conference. Due to our study design (i.e. to consider only
accepted  contributions)   we  could get   the data  only   after  all decisions   about   acceptance  or  rejection of  all
contributions had been made. After getting the data from the conference organisation we conducted an email survey
among all reviewers and authors as specified above. Unfortunately, we had to set a strict deadline of one week in
order to  have  enough  time   to analyse  the results  and prepare    the  final version  of this  conference  paper.  Our
questionnaire is structured as follows:

For authors and reviewers:
   -     Discipline(s): In which disciplines is the person trained (i.e. has a degree) and which discipline does he or
         she consider as main discipline?
   -     Interdisciplinarity of the research group to which the person belongs: How many people work in that group
         (graduate students and higher)? Is it a monodisciplinary group (which discipline?) or are there colleagues
         with different disciplinary background (which ones?)?
   -     Previous  interdisciplinary collaboration:    How   often   did  the  person   collaborate  with colleagues    with
         different disciplinary background in the past? How successful and satisfying was that collaboration?
   -     Main aspects in favour of interdisciplinary collaboration: free text
   -     Main aspects against interdisciplinary collaboration: free text

For authors additionally:
   -     Interdisciplinarity of the submitted paper:

                                                           776                                                    CSCL 2007
              o    Concerning the list of authors: Is it a monodisciplinary team (which discipline?) or do co-authors
                   have different disciplinary backgrounds (which ones?)? If co-authored are interdisciplinary: What
                   was the reason for establishing this collaboration?
              o    Concerning the research methods applied in the paper: What research methods are used (if not
                   clear form the registration/submission data)? To which disciplines are these methods assigned?
              o    Concerning the research topics tackled in the paper: What research topics are tackled (if not clear
                   form the registration/submission data)? To which disciplines are these topics assigned?

         In order to get a high acceptance for our survey in the community which should result in fast responses and
a high response rate, we promissed that all results will be aggregated and presented anonymously.

         From this data (registration/submission and survey) we planned to calculate the following distributions:
    -    Distribution of research topics
    -    Distribution of research methods
    -    Distribution of disciplines in the group of authors and of reviewers: e.g. computer science, psychology,
         information  science etc.  We    will consider  also   people with a  background   in multiple   disciplines, for
         example a person with a background in education and philosophy.
    -    Distribution of disciplines in the submissions
    -    Correlation between interdisciplinarity of papers and the nature of the authors' research group
    -    Correlation between interdisciplinarity of papers and previous experiences with interdisciplinary work

         We   will collect and cluster    the  responses concerning    motives for  interdisciplinary collaboration    and
beneficial and hindering factors for interdisciplinary work in CSCL.

          In total there were 222 reviewers for CSCL 2007. 74 of these 222 reviewers were also contact authors of
accepted contributions (papers, posters etc.) and received the author questionnaire. The remaining 148 reviewers
received the reviewer questionnaire.
The total number   of accepted contributions    was   155. As   some  persons  were contact  authors  for more than    one
contribution, there were 148 individuals who served as contact authors for these 155 contributions.

Response rates:
    ·    We received feedback from 41 out of 148 reviewers who did not serve as contact authors for accepted
         contributions ("only-reviewers"; 28 %).
    ·    From reviewers who also served as contact authors for accepted contributions we received feedback from
         19 out of 74 (27 %).
    ·    From contact authors who did not serve as reviewers we got feedback from 19 out of 69 (28 %).

          As some authors were contact authors for more than one paper and also some non-contact authors (who
got the questionnaire forwarded by the contact authors) responded, we got in total 47 author questionnaires. These
questionnaires refer to 43 out of 155 accepted contributions (28 %).

          Overall, a response rate of 27 ­ 28 % seems acceptable fo this email survey, especially as there was only
1 week time to fill out the questionnaire.

Results
         This section presents the results of our analysis. First, this includes the distribution of research topics and
methods,  the distribution of disciplines,   and the  distribution of  disciplines in the submissions.    We present   the
correlation between   interdisciplinarity of   papers and  the  nature of the  authors' research group    as well as   the
correlation between interdisciplinarity of papers and previous experiences with interdisciplinary work.
Finally, we  present  the results concerning   motives   for interdisciplinary collaboration and  hindering   factors  for
interdisciplinary work in CSCL.

                                                            777                                                 CSCL 2007
Research Topics and Methods
         The    questionnaire didn't provide  a list of  research topics  or research methods   to  choose   from. As a
consequence the answers to these questions were very heterogenous wrt. granularity and terminology. Actually,
they were    so heterogenous  that we   did not try  to calculate distributions of topics and methods    for this  paper.
Nevertheless,   we saw   that in many   cases the   same  topics  and  methods  are assigned  to different   or multiple
disciplines.

Disciplines and Main Disciplines
         As for topics and methods we also did not provide a list of disciplines to choose from in the questionnaire.
Thus again,   the answers  were  heterogenous   wrt. granularity  and  terminology. Table   1 lists the most frequently
mentioned disciplines, table 2 the most frequently mentioned main disciplines for the subgroup "only-reviewers".
Authors show similar distributions wrt. disciplines and main disciplines (not shown in this paper).

Table 1: Disciplines of reviewers.

                          Discipline                                Number of reviewers
                          Computer Science/Computing                11
                          Psychology                                10
                          Educational Science/Education             7
                          Educational Psychology                    3
                          Electrical Engineering                    3
                          Learning Sciences                         3
                          Teaching                                  3
                          Biology                                   2
                          Curriculum & Instruction                  2
                          E-Learning                                2
                          Information Science                       2
                          Sociology                                 2

         In addition, each of the following disciplines were stated by one person:
Art  History, Artificial Intelligence, Cardiorespiratory  sciences, Cognitive   Psychology, Cognitive   Studies,  CSCL,
Cultural Studies,   Curriculum   and   Methods   of   Teaching    Arabic, Design,   Digital librarianship,   Economics,
Educational Computing, Educational Measurement and Statistics, Educational Technology, Engineering, English &
linguistics, English and  American Literature, English Language and Literature, English Literature, Evaluation and
Measurement (Education), Human-Computer Interaction, Informatics, Information Systems, Instructional Systems
Technology, Knowledge Management, Library and Information Science, Linguistics, Media Arts, Music, Project
Management, Research, Sciences, Social Science, Statistics, Telecommunications Engineering.

         Note that these are 85 entries for a group of 41 persons, i.e. on average each person stated more than two
disciplines she has an academic degree in.

Table 2: Main disciplines of reviewers.

                          Main discipline                           Number of reviewers
                          Education                                 5
                          Learning Science                          5
                          Computer Science                          4
                          Educational Psychology                    4
                          Psychology                                4
                          Human Computer Interaction                3
                          Educational Sciences                      2
                          Information Science                       2
                          Linguistics                               2

                                                           778                                                  CSCL 2007
         For each of the following disciplines exactly on person states these as main discipline:
Cognitive & Collaborative Technology, CSCL, Curriculum and Instruction, Database theory, Didactics
Educational  Technology,   E-Learning,        Groupware   Engineering,  Language,     Learning  Theory,   Library  and
Information Science, New Technologies, Science Education, Teaching, Telematics Engineering.

Correlation    between      interdisciplinarity         of contributions        and   interdisciplinarity    of   the
authors research group
Table 3: Correlation between interdisciplinarity of contributions and research team.

                        Contribution                                Research team
                        Mono-disciplinary: 17                       Mono-disciplinary: 4
                                                                    Multi-disciplinary: 13
                        Multi-disciplinary: 24                      Mono-disciplinary: 1
                                                                    Multi-disciplinary: 23

         Table 3 shows   that in our   sample      (all author   questionnaires that  contain  enough  data about  the
interdisciplinarity of the contributions and of the research teams) only 5 of 41 teams are composed of reserachers
from only one discipline. 24 out of 41 contributions are made in interdisciplinary teams. And only in one case a
multidisciplinary contribution is authored from a person working in a mono-disciplinary group. (This group consists
of 2-5 members, i.e. it is relatively small.)
When we look at the main discipline of contributions authored individually or in mono-disciplinary teams we found
out that 9 out of 17 mono-disciplinary papers originate from psychology or educational psychology.

Table 4: Correlation between interdisciplinarity of contributions and experience with interdisciplinary
collaboration (collaboration behavior).

                        Contribution                                Collaboration behavior
                        Mono-disciplinary: 17                       Collaboration
                                                                    ...on a daily basis 3
                                                                    ...regulalry 5
                                                                    ...sometimes 7
                                                                    ...never 2
                        Multi-disciplinary: 24                      Collaboration
                                                                    ...on a daily basis 10
                                                                    ...regulalry 11
                                                                    ...sometimes 3
                                                                    ...never 0

         As we can see in table 4, behavior in inter-disciplinary seems to correlate with the interdisciplinarity of
contributions. In table 5 we look at success and satisfaction of previous collaborations. Success and satisfaction with
previous collaborations is considered higher      from  authors  in multidisciplinary teams   than in monodisciplinary
teams.

                                                            779                                                CSCL 2007
Table 5: Correlation between interdisciplinarity of contributions and experience with interdisciplinary
collaboration (success and satisfaction).

         Contribution                             Collaboration success       Collaboration
                                                                              satisfaction
         Mono-disciplinary: 17                    ...quite successful 6       ...quite satisfying 8
                                                  ...mixed 8                  ...mixed 6
                                                  ....quite unsuccessful 0    ....quite unsatisfying 0
                                                  ...no answer 3              ...no answer 3
         Multi-disciplinary: 22                   ...quite successful 13      ...quite satisfying 14
                                                  ...mixed 9                  ...mixed 8
                                                  ....quite unsuccessful 0    ....quite unsatisfying 0
                                                  ...no answer 0              ...no answer 0

Aspects in favor of interdisciplinary collaboration
       Reviewers and authors stated the following arguments pro and con interdisciplinary collaboration (in our
field) We clustered these aspects in the following way:

Interdisciplinary collaboration is natural and necessary for CSCL:
   ·   Interdisciplinary collaboration is seen as natural and necessary as CSCL and the Learning Sciences are
       interdisciplinary fields, tackle complex problems which require interdisciplinarity.

Better outcomes:
   ·   Interdisciplinary collaboration provides multiple perspectives, differents skills/strengths/opinions, different
       theoretical approaches and methodological frameworks, a broader knowledge base.
   ·   Different views, different knowledge etc. can be combined, one learns more about others' perspectives and
       about the problem. The combination provides a mpore holistic view. People share problems and mental
       models.
   ·   Methodological cross-fertilization
   ·   Cross-fertilization of ideas
   ·   Get a deeper understanding of other perspectives
   ·   More useful outcomes
   ·   Interdisciplinary collaboration leads to a focus on practice and provides common ground
   ·   Reduce bias

Individual outcomes:
   ·   Learn about other disciplines etc.
   ·   Make connections to other disciplines
   ·   Become more modest about your own field
   ·   Refine and sharpen your methods and concepts

Political reasons:
   ·   Increase awareness of learning sciences in science disiplines

Pragmatic reasons:
   ·   provide setting for evaluation (classroom)
   ·   provide hardware/equipment
   ·   specialisation in a discipline ironically requires interdisciplinary collaboration.

                                                          780                                                 CSCL 2007
Aspects challenging interdisciplinary collaboration
Differences lead to misunderstandings; require time/effort
   ·   There are a lot of differences between disciplines, e.g. wrt. disciplinary culture, language. Researchers have
       different   mental    models,   different  criteria for   evidence.  These   differences  lead   to  confusion  and
       misunderstandings. In order to overcome this there is a need for sharing and/or integration. This is costly
       and/or time-consuming. Time plays a role for the beginning of a int.coll. Also the maintanenace of an int.
       team requires high efforts. Dogmas and straight jackets of a discipline hinder integration.

Results don't justify effort
   ·   Sometimes the results of int. coll. do not justify the effort/the time.
   ·   Results are seen on a more theoretical level, not touchable. There is no increased understanding about the
       research topic.

Interdisciplinary collaboration requires good logistics (collaborators work in other buildings/campuses). It is not
easy to balance the perspectives in one study.

It requires mutual perception and appreciation (programmer vs. real researcher; use sw/etc. from collaborators)

It requires certain individual skills
   ·   Flexibility, openness for other approaches

Structures - Funding and Promotion:
   ·   Int. coll.  is demanded     by  university managers   and    politicians but existing structures  hinder  it: career,
       funding, promotion, tenure. There are little merits from int. coll.

Structures - Publication:
   ·   It is difficult to find a venue for interdisciplinary research
   ·   Least publishable unit vs. conceptually pulishable unit

Lack of interdisciplinary graduate level course work

Some problems simply don't require or benefit from interdisciplinary collaboration

Discussion
       This section discusses the results presented in the previous section. Our hypotheses (see first section) were
   1.  There   is substantial  interdisciplinary  collaboration   in the CSCL    community   as  it can  be seen from   the
       research groups community members belong to and from the co-authorship of community artefacts.
   2.  There    is    a  correlation   between    previous   experience     with  interdisciplinary   work   and     current
       interdisciplinary     collaboration "behaviour"     (i.e. if  one  has   good   experience   with   interdisciplinary
       collaboration chances are higher that he or she writes papers with interdisciplinary co-authorship).

       Wrt. the first hypothesis we have seen that more than half of the contributions (24 out of 41; in the sample
of our study) were written in interdisciplinary teams. We have also seen that only 5 (out of 41) authors work in
monodisciplinary teams. This demonstrates a substantial interdisciplinary collaboration in the CSCL community.
Wrt. the second hypothesis we showed that experience with interdisciplinary collaboration correlates with the nature
of author teams. Regular collaborators and people who experienced successful and satisfying collaborations before
seem to be more open and willing to participate in new collaborations.

       The analysis of the CSCL community members disciplines showed that people come from very different
backgrounds and often have a background in more than one discipline (see also previous studies: Hoadley 2005,
Kienle & Wessner 2006).
An interesting finding    is that the  majority  of monodisciplinary     contributions is in the  field of  psychology   or
educational psychology.      This might  indicate   problems such    as the ones  mentioned  in  the factors hindering   or

                                                            781                                                  CSCL 2007
challenging    interdisciplinary collaboration,  e.g.  specific   criteria for  evidence,    difficulties to  find  accepted
publication outlets or low merits in psychology for interdisciplinary collaboration in view of funding or promotion.

        As with many empirical studies, there are some limitations with our study which should be discussed here.
It might be that the response to our questionnaires is biased because only a certain subset of the reviewers and
authors responded to our questionnaire. For example, if only people respond who are interested in interdisciplinary
collaboration (a number of respondends actually did express their interest in the study's results) then the CSCL
community seems much more interdisciplinary than it really is. The actual response rate of 27 ­ 28% might also
limit the  significance  of this  study.  Another   problem    originates  from   the  international   nature  of  the  CSCL
community: Disciplines have slightly different names and meanings in different regions or even exist only in some
regions (as an  example   there  is no program   "Learning   Sciences"     at German   universities). Thus,   all quantitative
statements should be handled with care.

Conclusions & Future Work
        In this paper we presented an analysis of the CSCL community concerning the disciplines involved and the
collaboration between disciplines. The analysis is based on latest data gathered in the context of the CSCL 2007
conference. Starting with a list of reviewers and contact authors an email survey has been conducted among all
authors and reviewers for CSCL 2007.
        The    paper provided    some  evidence  that there is  substantial   interdisciplinary collaboration  in   the CSCL
community. This could be seen analysing the (inter-)disciplinarity of research groups and author teams in the CSCL
community. We have also seen that an author's experience with interdisciplinary collaboration correlates with the
interdisciplinarity of the CSCL 2007 conference contributions of that author.
CSCL    researchers  are convinced   that CSCL   in many    or most  cases    requires interdisciplinary  collaboration   (see
section on aspects in favor of interdisciplinary collaboration above). Thus, it is important to tackle the challenging
aspects for interdisciplinary  collaboration  as mentioned   above.   Such    actions  cover multiple  layers  of   the CSCL
community. Some challenges can be addressed by each individual CSCL researcher, others require strategic actions
on the community level. As an example: It was very difficult to find a high-quality and (at least for some core
discipline(s)) widely  accepted   publication outlet  for interdisciplinary    CSCL    research  until two    years ago.  The
international  Journal on   CSCL    (ijCSCL)  helped  to  improve   this   situation. Also  the  funding  situation  changed
recently as can be seen for example in the European Kaleidoscope project.

        While this study provides a current snapshot of disciplines and interdisciplinarity in the CSCL community
it would also be fruitful to trace interdisciplinarity throughout the complete CSCL conference series. This might
lead us to a general pattern how interdisciplinarity evolves, develops and is utilized in a scientific community.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Gijsbert Erkens, Yasmin Kafai and Nancy Songer for providing lists of
authors and    reviewers  and  for  granting permission   to   use this  data  for our  research.   We    are grateful  to all
participants of our study for their collaboration and timely response to our survey.

References
Hoadley,   C.  M.   (2005): The    shape  of the  elephant:  Scope    and     membership   of   the CSCL    community.     In:
       Proceedings of CSCL 2005.
Kienle, A.  &   Wessner,    M.   (2005): Our  Way   to Taipei   -  An   Analysis   of  the First Ten   Years   of  the  CSCL
       Community. In: Proceedings of CSCL 2005.
Kienle, A.    & Wessner,    M.   (2006):  The   CSCL   Community      in   its  First  Decade:   Development,     Continuity,
       Connectivity. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL) 1 (1), pp. 9-
       33.
Klein, J. T. (1990). Interdisciplinarity: history, theory, and practice. Detroit :Wayne State University.
Puntambekar S., & Young M. F. (2003). Moving toward a theory of CSCL. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, & U.
       Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for change in networked learning environments. Proceedings of the international

                                                            782                                                     CSCL 2007
       conference on computer support for collaborative learning 2003 (pp. 503­512). Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
       Kluwer.
Stahl G. (2002). Contributions to a theoretical framework     for CSCL. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for
       collaborative learning. Foundations for a CSCL community. Proceedings of the international conference on
       computer support for collaborative learning 2002 (pp. 62­71). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
       (LEA).

                                                         783                                               CSCL 2007
