        Learning About Transfer in an Online Problem-Based Course

 Alan Bitterman, Natalie Hatrak, Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 10 Seminary
                                     Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1183 USA
                     Email:  alanbit@eden.rutgers.edu, nhatrak@ets.org, chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu

         Abstract:     Problem-based      learning   (PBL)  is  an  instructional  method     in which    students
         collaboratively learn through problem-solving.        Students  solve  a complex  problem,    direct their
         own learning, and reflect on their learning.   In a STELLAR course, PBL was adapted for an online
         CSCL environment for preservice teachers.      The study demonstrates that students who participated
         in a STELLAR course learned more about transfer than students in a traditional course.

         Problem-based    learning   (PBL)   is a  methodology     for student-centered   learning   that relies   on small,
facilitated, collaborative groups (Barrows, 1996).     In PBL, students learn through solving complex problems and
reflecting on their experiences.    As students work on a problem, they identify what they need to know in order to
solve a  problem   and   engage  in self-directed learning to  address  those   needs.  The facilitator acts to guide the
learning process, helping to promote the development of knowledge and reasoning strategies as well as promoting
self-regulated learning.  PBL curricula have had positive effects in promoting learning and transfer, particularly in
medical  education   (Gijbels,  Dochy,   Van den   Bossche,  &   Segers,  2005;   Hmelo,  1998).  The   STELLAR       (Socio-
Technical Environment for Learning and Learning-Activity Research) system adapts the PBL model to specifically
support preservice teachers in gaining an understanding of Educational Psychology that they can transfer to their
classroom practice.   PBL should promote effective transfer because students repeatedly bring together conceptual
ideas underlying a domain with visions and plans of professional practice as they construct what we call a meshed
schema representation (Derry, 2006; Derry, Hmelo-Silver, Nagarajan, Chernobilsky, & Beitzel, 2006).

         STELLAR      is an online  PBL   environment   that   enables preservice  teachers   to engage   with Educational
Psychology concepts by using video cases as contexts for collaborative lesson redesign.             The system consists of
three components:    an online Educational Psychology hypertextbook (the Knowledge Web); a PBL online module;
and a library of video cases that present examples of classroom practice.         These cases provide rich contexts that
present opportunities for discussion as students engage in redesign of instruction depicted in the cases as well as
providing links to the Knowledge Web, helping students identify fruitful learning issues.         The PBL online module
includes tools that provide a loose script as they scaffold students' individual and group PBL activities (Dillenbourg,
2002). These include a personal notebook where students record initial observations, a threaded discussion, where
students share research,    and a   whiteboard  where  students  discuss  proposals  for  lesson  redesigns.   These   tools
embody an instructional planning process based on the backwards design model of Wiggins and McTighe (1998).

         STELLAR courses consist of 3-4 problems each lasting 2-3 weeks using a           hybrid online and face-to-face
course  structure. The   asynchronous    discussions promote   reflection and  allow a  facilitator to  work  with  multiple
groups.  We  integrated  domain-specific    scaffolding to support  principled    instructional  design activities and  help
structure the collaborative PBL process.    The students' goal is to redesign a lesson based on Educational Psychology
principles. They begin by individually studying a video case (STEP 1). In STEP 2, they record observations and
brief individual   redesign proposals  in an online   personal  notebook   that guides  students  towards   lesson  features
relevant for redesign.   This work is shared with group members in STEP 3. The group identifies concepts they need
to explore for redesign (STEP 4), conducts and shares research (STEP 5), and collaboratively designs lessons (STEP
6). They use threaded discussions and a group whiteboard as shared workspaces in steps 4-6.         The redesign is shared
at a poster session. The students meet face-to-face for STEP 4 and again as they present solutions at the completion
of STEP 6.  Students provide individual explanations of the group proposal in STEP 7 and reflections in STEP 8.

         In previous   research,  we have   demonstrated   that students  who   have   participated in  STELLAR       courses
demonstrate  improved    understanding    on targeted   learning outcomes   (Derry   et  al., 2006).    The   earlier results
demonstrated that students who participated in a STELLAR course learned more about the concept of understanding
than  a comparison   group.  The    goal of the current study   is to  examine    whether other   targeted outcomes    were
achieved, in this case, whether students learned about the concept of transfer.

                                                            78                                                     CSCL 2007
           The purpose   of  the current   research  was   to  examine   1)  students'  acquisition of knowledge     about    the
concept    and principles of  transfer  and  2)  their ability   to generate ideas  about instructional methods      that would
facilitate transfer and the learning process.    It was hoped that the questions the participants answered would capture
their knowledge along the three dimensions as defined by Sugrue (1995): concepts, the principles that link concepts,
and the    conditions   and  procedures    under which    concepts    and  principles  should  be applied.    The    hypothesis
underlying the research was that students in a PBL class would outperform students in a traditional class in both
their knowledge acquisition and application of that knowledge.

Methods
           Seventy preservice teachers taking Educational Psychology classes in a state university in the northeast
United States participated in the research.     Thirty-three participants were taught Educational Psychology in the PBL
class.  The  remaining   thirty-seven   participants   were   drawn   from   the Educational   Psychology    subject  pool    and
received course credit for their participation. The PBL class was organized around five themes: the constructive
nature of knowledge (understanding), the social nature of learning, transfer, motivation, and feedback and revision.
The STELLAR participants had access to the STELLAR environment described above. They were required to work
in groups to discuss their understanding of material and construct group learning artifacts. The groups were formed
to be heterogeneous with respect to the different planned teaching specialties. The comparison classes used standard
textbooks. Participants in the traditional classes met face-to-face and participated in lectures and other activities that
their course instructors deemed appropriate.

           Participants viewed a brief video in which high school students learned about electricity, electrical circuits,
and how a light bulb works.      Before viewing the video, they received a brief written explanation describing how the
video clip illustrated a problem the teacher had identified in his teaching. The video explained how the teacher had
spent a month covering advanced topics in electricity and provided hands-on experience designed to reinforce those
concepts and illustrate how electricity enabled a light bulb to work.            The video also showed an interview with a
student before   and   after  instruction  and  demonstrated     that she  maintained   the  same misconceptions     following
instruction. After viewing the video, the participants in both the traditional and STELLAR classes were given pretest
questions.  They had thirty minutes to answer the following four questions:            1) How do you know that the student
failed  to learn?, 2)  Why   did the student   fail to   learn?, 3)  What  recommendations     would  you    make to  help    him
improve his teaching?, and 4) What else do you need to know to better understand the teaching-learning situation?
What additional questions would you ask?         At the end of the semester, the participants in both the traditional and
STELLAR classes completed an identical posttest.

           On the pre- and post-tests, a rubric on the concept of transfer was used to evaluate participants' responses,
and then a rating between 0 and 3 was assigned to the participants' overall responses.           The transfer rubric included
several features of transfer that participants could use to discuss the video including the fact that transfer: 1) requires
understanding,    2) involves  activating    appropriate  prior     knowledge and   applying   something     learned in   a   new
situation, 3) involves abstraction and cognitive flexibility, 4) can be near or far transfer, and 5) can be preparation
for future learning.    The ratings were based on the degree to which the participants included and elaborated upon
these  features  of  transfer in their  written  answers     to  the  four questions   noted   above.  The   ratings  indicated
progressively greater understanding of the concept of transfer and its application.          Answers that received a level 0
rating  indicated  that there was  no   evidence    that the  target  concept was   understood.   A level 1 rating indicated
incomplete understanding and a lack of causal explanation or application of concepts.               A level 2 rating showed
greater understanding and elaboration.      A level 3 rating showed sophisticated understanding, with explanations that
showed     cause   and  connections     to other frameworks.        This was  adapted    from   the   rubric for  the   concept
"understanding" used in Derry et al. (2006).        Participants' written responses were scored blind to condition.         Two
independent raters scored 30% of the data and had interrater reliability of 83.33%.             Disagreements were resolved
through discussion.

Results
           Means   and  standard  deviations   for  both  classes   are  shown   in Table   1.  A 2x2   mixed    ANOVA        was
conducted using time as a within subject factor and class as the between subject factor (STELLAR vs. Traditional).
The results of the ANOVA showed a significant class x time interaction, F (1, 68) = 106.18, p <. 001.                     Simple
effects tests  showed   a   significant change   over    time for   the PBL   class (t (32)=12.79,  p<.001)   but not     for the
traditional class (t(36)=1, p=.32).

                                                                 79                                                   CSCL 2007
                     Table 1: Pretest and Posttest Means and Standard Deviations

                             Type of Class           N         Pretest           Posttest

                              STELLAR                33     0.71 (0.31)        2.02 (0.69)
                             Traditional             37     0.61 (0.36)        0.68 (0.34)

Conclusions
          The results of this research indicate that students who participated in the STELLAR course constructed a
deeper understanding of the concept of transfer and were able to apply their understanding of the concept to generate
recommendations for improvements of instructional methods.        This evidence helps provides generality to the results
of Derry et al. (in press), which demonstrated similar results for another targeted concept.

          The STELLAR    approach   represents  an example     of a problem-based  approach   to CSCL.    These results
suggest that 1) problem-based approaches can foster deep learning and 2) an integrated CSCL system can be used
for PBL.    Further research is needed    to examine the  impact   of student interaction with different aspects of the
STELLAR system, with each other, and with the facilitator.

References
Barrows, H.S. (1996). Problem-based learning in medicine and beyond.         In L. Wilkerson & W.H. Gijselaers (Eds.),
          New directions for teaching and learning: Vol. 68. Bringing problem-based learning to higher education:
          Theory and practice (pp. 3-13). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Derry, S. J. (2006). ESTEP as a case of theory-based web course design. In A. M. O'Donnell, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, &
          G. Erkens (Eds.), Collaborative reasoning, learning and technology (pp. 171-196). Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
Derry, S. J., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Nagarajan, A., Chernobilsky, E., & Beitzel, B. (2006). Cognitive transfer revisited:
          Can we exploit new media to solve old problems on a large Scale?         Journal of Educational Computing
          Research. 35, 145-162.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design
      (pp. 61-91).  In P. A. Kirschner Three worlds of CSCL. Heerlen, Open Universitat Nederland.
Dochy, F., Segers, M., Van den Bossche, P., & Gijbels, D. (2003). Effects of problem-based learning: A meta-
          analysis. Learning and Instruction, 13, 533-568.
Gijbels, D., Dochy, F., & Van den Bossche, P. & Segers, M. (2005). Effects of problem-based learning: A meta-
          analysis from the angle of assessment. Review of Educational Research, 75, 27-61.
Hmelo, C.E. (1998). Problem-based learning: Effects on the early acquisition of cognitive skill in medicine. Journal
          of the Learning Sciences, 7, 173-208.
Hmelo-Silver,  C.E.  (2004). Problem-based     learning: What   and how   do  students learn?  Educational Psychology
          Review, 16, 235-266.
Sugrue, B. (1995). A theory-based framework for assessing domain-specific problem solving ability. Educational
          Measurement: Issues and Practice, 14, 29-36.
Wiggins, G., & McTighe, J. (1998). Understanding by design. Alexandria VA: ASCD.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by NSF ROLE grant # 0107032 to Sharon Derry and Cindy Hmelo-Silver. Any opinions,
findings, and  conclusions or   recommendations    expressed   in  this material are those of  the authors and   do not
necessarily reflect the views    of the   National Science     Foundation.   We   thank   Sharon Derry   for her many
contributions to the ideas in this paper.

                                                            80                                                 CSCL 2007
