Designing Collaborative Mathematics Activities for Classroom Device
                                                      Networks

                                     Tobin White, Kevin Lai and Garrett Kenehan
                        School of Education, UC Davis, One Shields Ave., Davis, CA 95616
                          twhite@ucdavis.edu, kslai@ucdavis.edu, gjkenehan@ucdavis.edu

         Abstract: This paper explores the potential of networked devices to support classroom problem
         solving in  small   groups. We    articulate two   principles   for designing   networked   collaborative
         activities: that they should 1) balance the group's collective engagement of shared objects with
         opportunities for individual student manipulation of those objects and 2) coordinate networked
         interactions among student-controlled objects with mathematically meaningful relationships. To
         illustrate these principles, we present a scenario for small-group collaboration involving classroom
         device networks.

Introduction
         Networks   of  graphing  calculators   and   handheld   computers    provide the  potential   for  a range   of new
structures for classroom  collaboration   (Roschelle    &   Pea, 2002).  In  particular, connections   among     these linked
devices can support networked interactions that complement conventional, face-to-face social transactions in the
classroom. Computer-supported collaborative learning often takes one of two forms. In the first, participants engage
one another at a distance, through the computer, such that the network serves as a substitute for or an alternative to
collocated interaction. In the second, participants engage one another around a computer, such that the technology
complements    collocated interaction  by  providing     a medium   for   coordinating   words,   gestures,   or expressions.
Classroom mobile device networks offer distinctive possibilities for simultaneously capitalizing on both of these
collaborative modes; our work seeks to develop and explore that potential.

         Classroom networks typically feature two interfaces: those available to individual students through their
respective devices, and that of a server machine available for collective engagement through a projected display.
Similarly,  many   classroom  network   architectures   are organized    around  exchanges   of  information     from  student
devices to a teacher's server and the reverse, rather than between student devices. Each of these constraints poses
significant challenges for the design of collaborative activities among small groups of students within a whole-class
network. This paper explores network topologies and task designs that address these challenges in order to fulfill
what we see as the collaborative promise of networked devices. To that end, we identify two key principles in the
design of collaborative activities for classroom networks, and then describe a prototype design representing our
efforts to enact those  principles.  The  first of these   principles involves   balancing   a tension   between   providing
students with individual engagement of mathematical objects, and sharing control of those objects across the linked
devices  of multiple   students in   a group.   The   second    principle emphasizes     our  interest in   using  important
relationships  among   relevant  mathematical    objects    as frameworks     around  which    to organize    corresponding
networked   transactions  among   devices,   and   collaborative   interactions  among    students.  These    principles   are
elaborated in turn below.

Coordinated Control of Collective Objects
         Our   approach   to conceptualizing    small group    collaboration  is compatible    with that   of Roschelle    and
Teasley (1995), who define collaboration in terms of participants' ongoing efforts "to construct and maintain a
shared  conception  of  a problem."    In that  regard,  we  seek  to  develop   problem-solving    tasks  around   students'
engagement    with collective  mathematical     objects. Such    objects are  collective  to the  extent   that  they  can be
simultaneously examined and jointly manipulated by multiple participants. The objects of interest in this paper are
mathematical phenomena such as functions, expressions, coordinates, shapes, or sets. We take such objects to be
collective when they or their attributes appear--and change--simultaneously on the devices of multiple students, or
when they appear in a shared display as a consequence of contributions from multiple students. Control of such
objects might take the form of, for example, entering an algebraic expression, adjusting a parameter, translating a
graph, editing a table, or moving a point. The issue of shared control, then, concerns the ways and the extent to
which such object manipulations are conducted jointly. Does one student take responsibility for editing an algebraic
expression while the others consult? Or does each student edit a parameter of a shared expression? Or does each

                                                             784                                                    CSCL 2007
student enter and alter her own expression? Personal devices can provide each student with the capacity to make
independent contributions to networked collaborative activity. While this capacity affords rich opportunities for the
participation and engagement    of  all students    in a  group, it also  necessitates  careful management    of those
contributions in order to ensure that they lead to productive collaboration.

Mathematically Meaningful Links
       The second key element of our approach involves designing activities and problem-solving situations in
which networked social relationships among students are aligned with mathematical relationships. In particular, both
the ways control of objects is shared among students, and the ways resources and responsibilities are distributed
among students, are organized so as to reflect important links among mathematical phenomena. This principle is
closely related to Stroup, Ares & Hurford's (2005) notion of mathematics structuring social activity in networked
classrooms.   Because our   designs target small    groups of  two  to  four  students, they emphasize   mathematical
relationships of similar scale. The scenario presented in this paper, for example, highlights the unique linear relation
specified by two distinct points in a Cartesian plane. Our collaborative activities are organized around network
topologies that are based on this mathematical relationship, so that a student group might be defined by the network
in terms of the curve specified by the set of points through which it must pass, each of which is controlled by a
different student. The instructional goal of linking mathematical and social interactions in this way is to use the
connections among students to make salient the corresponding connections among the representations and objects
those students respectively observe and control--recognition and understanding of those mathematical relationships
is a central learning objective for these designs.

Group-Level Graphing: Relating Points and Curves
       This    scenario uses the NetLogo    modeling     environment   (Wilensky, 1999)   and   HubNet   network  tools
(Wilensky & Stroup, 1999) in concert with the TI-Navigator 3.0TM graphing calculator network to situate collective
objects shared by small groups in a public classroom display shared by the whole class. In this design, teams of two
students jointly manipulate points and curves in a coordinate graph assigned to their group. A single machine
projected at the front of the room functions as a server and a collective display for up to twelve groups. Figure 1
shows the respective graphing calculator screens and coordinate locations for a pair of students collaborating in a
"Lines" activity, and Figure 2 shows their collective graph as it appear in the public display. Each student in this pair
uses arrow keys on her calculator to control the location of a point displayed both on the personal device and in the
shared graphing window. That student's point is paired with that of a partner so that the coordinates of their points
collectively define a line. As each student moves the individual point controlled by her device, the collective display
dynamically   updates both  the algebraic  equation    and the   graph of the resulting  linear function even as  it is
continually transformed by students' position changes. Students are asked to perform a variety of tasks in this
setting, such as generating a new line that maintains the same y-intercept but features a specified new slope, or
maintains the  slope  while adjusting the  intercept.  In  order to complete  these tasks, students must   explore the
relationships between their respective points and the shared curve as they learn to coordinate their movements
toward the desired transformations. The "Lines" activity also allows two pairs of students to share the same graph
(Figure 2). This enables each pair of students to collaborate within the pair but also enables interaction with the
other pair on the same grid. By undertaking tasks involving generating parallel, perpendicular, intersecting or other
relationships among these lines, students must coordinate their efforts with one another within and between pairs as
they negotiate a complex set of relationships among points, and among the curves those points define.

                        Figure 1. Two student calculator screens in the "Lines" activity.

                                                           785                                                CSCL 2007
                   Figure 2. One and two student pairs in publicly displayed graphs.

       The "Lines" activity illustrates our principles regarding both coordinated control and mathematical links. In
each of these tasks, students control both an individual object, in the form of their respective points, and a collective
object in the form of a line. While each student freely moves a distinct point, moving the line in accordance with
various tasks requires two students to carefully coordinate those individual movements. Moreover, the relationship
between these two students follows from the mathematical relationship through which two points in a coordinate
plane uniquely determine a line. In the activities for two pairs of students and their respective lines, the social
interactions among pairs correspond to a second level of mathematical relationships, namely among the linear
functions generated by each pairs' set of points. In each case, the tasks require students to reconcile their networked
interactions with relevant mathematical relationships among the objects they manipulate.

Conclusion
       The collaborative scenario presented in this  paper     represents  one approach  to negotiating the tension
between collective ownership and individual control of mathematical objects, and to linking social and mathematical
relationships in a problem-solving space. Different scenarios invariably enact these principles in different ways; we
see the example presented here as a starting point toward exploration of a much broader range of collaborative
possibilities opened up by classroom device networks. These two principles are by no means comprehensive with
regard to collaborative designs in these connected classroom settings. Rather, they reflect themes that have been
particularly salient in our initial implementation efforts and instructive in our designs to date. We expect that our
continuing efforts to implement these networked problem-solving activities, and to design additional collaborative
scenarios, will allow us to further expand and elaborate these principles even as we derive empirical insights into the
nature and the effectiveness of the learning opportunities they provide.

References
Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (2002). A walk on the WILD side: How wireless hand-helds may change CSCL. In G. Stahl
       (Ed.), Proceedings of the  CSCL  (Computer    Supported     Collaborative    Learning) 2002. Boulder,   CO,
       January, 7-11 2002. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roschelle, J. & Teasley, S.D. (1995). The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In C.
       O'Malley (Ed.), Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 69-97). New York: SpringerVerlag.
Stroup, W., Ares, N., & Hurford, A. (2005). A dialectic analysis of generativity: Issues of network-supported design
       in mathematics and science. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 7(3), 181-206.
Wilensky, U. & Stroup, W. (1999a). HubNet. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/hubnet.html. Center for Connected
       Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.
Wilensky, U. 1999. NetLogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-
       Based Modeling, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL.

Acknowledgments
Support for the work presented in this paper was provided through a seed grant from Texas Instruments.

                                                         786                                                 CSCL 2007
