              Online Video Repository and Supportive Community
                                          for Beginning Teachers
         Greg Wientjes, Jawed Karim, Stanford University, SCIL, Building 160, Stanford, CA 94305-2055
                                 Email: wientjes@stanford.edu, jawed@stanford.edu

         Abstract: Nearly half of public school teachers leave in their first five years of teaching, and the
         inadequacy of their preparation is a significant challenge to their success. Teacher attrition results
         in part from frustration caused by inadequate preparation and lack of a professional development
         support system. Beginning teachers lack access to exemplars of effective teaching practices. This
         paper proposes a design framework addressing these problems via a free Internet-based resource
         for teachers to share videos of their teaching practices and exchange ideas through a supportive
         online community.      This resource   would  present  easily  accessible videos  of model   practices,
         problem representations, problem solutions. The website would provide a supportive community
         for beginning teachers; enable them to: form groups centered on common interests, exchange
         messages, and offer one another feedback on teaching practices; facilitate sharing of classroom
         materials  and   best practices; and  allow  teachers  to post profiles of professional  and  personal
         information.

Introduction
         40% to 50% of all US public school teachers leave the profession in their first five years (Ingersoll, 2003),
and the  inadequacy    of their preparation  has  been  documented    through outcome,    observational,  and  self-report
studies (Collinson & Ono, 2001; US Department of Education, 1999; Wanat & Cancino, 1996). Part of the attrition
is due to low salaries (American Federation of Teachers, 2005; Ingersoll & Smith, 2003); however, part is due to
teachers' frustrations caused by insufficient knowledge and skills (Department of Education Science and Training,
2002; MacDonald, 1999) and by lack of a professional development support system (Dymoke & Harrison, 2006;
Johnson & Birkeland, 2003). With teacher attrition close to 50% in their first five years, the cost of teacher training
is approximately twice what it would be without such attrition. Furthermore, beginning teachers' lack of adequate
skills results in human costs of frustration and disillusionment for these teachers, as well as substandard educational
outcomes for their students. Beginning teachers face numerous challenges in their induction into the profession:
acquiring   on-site knowledge   of   students, curriculum, and   the school;  developing   appropriate   coursework and
lectures; implementing an initial repertoire of lessons; cultivating the classroom learning environment; creating a
professional identity; and learning in and from practice (Feiman-Nemser, 2001). Teachers additionally encounter a
variety of  challenges  throughout   their  careers,  including broad   problems   such as how   to maintain   classroom
discipline and how to motivate their students to learn, as well as very specific issues such as how to best teach a
particular type of math problem. Current approaches to the development of beginning teachers' skills include the
training they receive in their teacher education program, professional meetings, and professional journals. However,
traditional teacher  training   programs   are generally insufficient   (McCormack     &  Thomas,   2003).  Professional
meetings  are expensive   for   teachers to attend ­  costing  time and  money,    including the need  to hire substitute
teachers to cover the classes of those at such professional meetings. Furthermore, few professional meetings present
actual models or examples of effective teaching practices, and professional journals generally do not provide actual
models of practices.

         Multiple Internet-based distance learning tools have been developed to facilitate teacher education and
professional  support;  examples   include   Teachscape,   BEST,    and  Survive   and  Thrive   Virtual Conference  for
Beginning Teachers. Teachscape (www.teachscape.com) provides an online resource for professional development
training in teaching (Dede, 2003), which includes some video content of models of practice and interviews of
experienced teachers and examples of coursework. The BEST (Beginning and Establishing Successful Teachers)
website (www.uow.edu.au/educ/students/best.html) seeks to address the problem of teacher attrition by providing an
online professional community for teachers through web forums and discussion boards, weblogs and sharing of
curriculum   materials (Herrington   &    Herrington, 2006).  Survive   and Thrive  Virtual  Conference   for  Beginning
Teachers (www.survivethrive.on.ca) strives to support beginning teachers by providing online conferences given by
experienced teachers on the following themes: literacy, working with parents and families, professional issues,
classroom management, special education, and assessment and reporting. Limitations of currently available services
include: (a) They do not permit the large-scale sharing of videos of teachers in practice; (b) They are not all free to

                                                            787                                                 CSCL 2007
use; (c) Their content is restricted behind registration and login barriers; (d) Social networking functionality is
generally not available on the sites; (e) They lack a tagging functionality that would enable users to easily search for
and access specific exemplars relating to teaching challenges facing them. This paper proposes a design framework
to address the practical problems described above through the construction of a web-based resource for beginning
teachers (see Figure 1). The resource would provide videos of models of teaching practice and serve as a supportive
community for beginning teachers.

Video Representations of Teaching
       Given the utility of exemplars of practices for those learning a set of skills (Woody, 2003), approaches to
improve the performance of beginning teachers should provide multiple models of various aspects of teaching in a
manner that is easily accessible to teachers. Research in educational psychology has shown that people with these
representations do better   work  (Woody,  2003).    By  `easily accessible',  we mean  inexpensive  with respect  to
resources such as money and time, as well as convenient to teachers' schedules. The design of the website should
follow the guiding principles of authentic learning environments, which include: realistic contexts and true-to-life
activities (Brown, et al., 1989); access to expert performances and models of practices (Lave & Wenger, 1991);
numerous   viewpoints   and roles (Spiro, et al., 1991);  collaborative   knowledge creation (Collins, et al., 1989);
occasions for reflection (Boud, 1985); occasions for articulation (Lave & Wenger, 1991); mentoring and scaffolding
(Greenfield, 1984); and authentic assessment (Reeves & Okey, 1996). The online video resource proposed here will
have user-provided  variety  of  representations  of teaching  problems   and  problem solutions. This approach  also
proposes to include a user-rating system to provide peer review of the video segments that are posted. The video-
sharing website, YouTube (www.youtube.com), demonstrates that such an Internet video resource can feasibly be
built and that video on the Internet is widely used. A limitation of this proof of concept is that YouTube is primarily
a recreational resource rather than an educational resource, although YouTube certainly has the capability to deliver
instruction. Nevertheless,  the multitude of distance   learning  applications on  the web such   as Stanford  Online
(http://scpd.stanford.edu)  and   Harvard    Distance    Education   (http://www.extension.harvard.edu/DistanceEd/)
demonstrate that distance learning can be successful.

An Online Community for Teachers
       This proposed research will provide an online professional community to support teachers. A supportive
professional community for beginning teachers would help reduce attrition by minimizing new teachers' sense of
isolation in the classroom. The website would include functionality such as the ability to join groups focused on
topics of shared interest, the ability to: exchange messages, give feedback on teaching practice, share classroom
course material and best practices, and post teacher profiles of professional and personal information. The online
community would be a source of encouragement and inspiration for beginning teachers through their interactions
with peers and models of practice. This resource would provide a means for beginning teachers to seek advice from
peers and mentor teachers to help them solve specific practical problems facing them as they are inducted into the
profession. Facebook (www.facebook.com) serves as a proof of concept that an online community can be created
and used extensively. However, this proof of concept is limited in that Facebook is primarily a social, rather than an
instructional resource, and restricted to predetermined communities, whereas the proposed approach would be open
to anyone.

Additional Characteristics of the Proposed Approach
       This    resource would   be free to   users.  The pilot   project could be supported  through   government  or
foundation educational research and development funding. If the user-base grows, the website could be supported
through advertising. A measure of the project's success could be the extent of site utilization (number of users).
Some might argue that the approach proposed here is not practical, because privacy concerns make the display of
children's faces problematic. The developers of the website could seed the video repository with only videos of
teachers and not display the faces of the children or their names. Users of the site could be required to agree to the
terms of service, which would specify that neither the faces, nor last names, nor any other personally identifying
information of any minor or other individual besides the teacher would appear on the video. Thus, concerns about
privacy would be addressed.

Figures

                                                          788                                                 CSCL 2007
                                        Figure 1. Proposed Website Organization

References
American Federation of Teachers. (2005). Survey and Analysis of Teacher Salary Trends 2004.
Boud, D., Keogh, R., & Walker, D. (1985). Promoting reflection in learning: A model. In D. Boud, R. Keogh, & D.
       Walker (Eds.), Reflection: Turning experience into learning (pp. 18-40). London: Kogan Page.
Brown, J.   S., Collins,  A.,  & Duguid,   P.  (1989). Situated cognition   and the  culture of learning.   Educational
       Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Collins, A., Brown, J.S., & Newman, S.E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing,
       and mathematics (pp. 453-494). In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning & instruction. Hillsdale: LEA.
Collinson,  V., &  Ono,   Y.   (2001). The Professional  Development    of  Teachers in the  United  States and Japan.
       European Journal of Teacher Education, 24(2), 223-48.
Dede, C. (2003). High-Tech Support for New Teacher Retention in Urban Schools. NECC 2003 Conference.
Department   of  Education     Science and  Training.  (2003).  Australia's teachers:   Australia's future: Advancing
       innovation, science, technology and mathematics. Canberra: AGPS.
Dymoke, S., & Harrison, J.K. (2006). Professional Development and the Beginning Teacher: Issues of Teacher
       Autonomy and Institutional Conformity in the Performance Review Process. Journal of Education for
       Teaching. 32(1), 71-92.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2001). From preparation to practice: Designing a continuum to strengthen and sustain teaching.
       Teachers College Record, 103(6), 1013-1055.
Gold, Y. (1996). Beginning teacher support: attrition, mentoring, and induction. In J. Sikula (Ed.), Handbook of
       Research on Teacher Education, 2nd edition (pp. 548-594). New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
Greenfield, P.M. (1984). A theory of the teacher in the learning activities of everyday life. In B. Rogoff & J. Lave
       (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context (pp. 117-138). Cambridge, MA: HUP.
Herrington, A., & Herrington, J., Kervin, L., Ferry, B. (2006). The design of an online community of practice for
       beginning teachers. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 6(1), 120-132.
Ingersoll, R.M. (2003). Is there really a teacher shortage. Washington: CSTP.
Ingersoll, R.M.,  &     Smith, T.M.    (2003). The  wrong  solution  to the  teacher  shortage  problem.  Educational
       Leadership, 60(8), 30-33.
Johnson, S., & Birkeland, S. (2003). Pursuing a `Sense of Success': New Teachers Explain Their Career Decisions.
       American Educational Research Journal, 40(3), 581-617.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: CUP.
Macdonald, D. (1999). Teacher attrition: A review of literature. Teacher and Teacher Education, 15, 835-848.
McCormack, A., & Thomas, K. (2003). Is survival enough? Induction experiences of beginning teachers within a
       New South Wales context. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 31(2), 125-138.
Reeves, T.C., & Okey, J.R. (1996). Alternative assessment for constructivist learning environments. In B. G. Wilson
       (Ed.), Constructivist learning environment (pp. 191-202). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology.
Spiro, R.J., Feltovich, P.J., Jacobson, M.J., & Coulso, R.L. (1991). Knowledge representation, content specification,
       and development of skill in situation-specific knowledge assembly. Educational Technology, 31(9), 22-25.
US Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (1999). Teacher Quality: A Report on the
       Preparation and Qualifications of Public School Teachers. Washington: US Government Printing Office.
Wanat, S. F., & Cancino, H. E. (1996). Classroom Diversity Issues: How Beginning Teachers See Them. San
       Francisco State University College of Education Review, 8, 93-99.
Woody, A.I.     (2003). On Explanatory    Practice and  Disciplinary Identity.  Annals  of the New   York Academy  of
       Sciences, 988, 22-29.

                                                           789                                                CSCL 2007
