        Professional Visions in the Liminal Worlds of Graphs

      Ken Wright, Vanderbilt University, Peabody 330, 230 Appleton Place, Nashville, TN 37203,
                                       k.wright@vanderbilt.edu

       Abstract: A pair of comparable but contrasting episodes wherein biostatisticians narrate within
       the Cartesian space of regression graphs produced by software, illustrates how close analysis of
       narrations can reveal distinctive professional visions that correspond to differing views of work in
       biostatistical consulting or lecturing. Graphs serve as material anchors for conceptual blends that
       form the basis for narratives that merge Cartesian space with the space of artifacts from the setting
       from which the data came.

Introduction
      Technical disciplines have distinctive material representations that experts tend to deploy more
adroitly than novices. Experts invoke the privilege of coding and highlighting salient features of produced
material representations in a way that constitutes a professional vision distinctive to that discipline
(Goodwin, 1994). Indeed, to become an expert is to be "disciplined" to perceive accordingly (Stevens &
Hall, 1998). A question for research is to explain how experts interact with novices to "discipline" their
perception. In this study, I contrast how two biostatisticians spoke for the biostatistical practice of
interpreting graphs, deploying them as medical researchers or other biostatisticians looked on. In these
two brief selected episodes, both biostatisticians spoke in front of an audience beside screens illuminated
by LCD projectors, about data summarized by graphical displays of regression analysis. But the
biostatisticians differ in status: Steve is a Masters level biostatistician and Leonard is a full professor and
head of the department. Steve spoke to an audience of researchers only, Leonard spoke to a group
comprised of researchers and fellow statisticians. Furthermore, Steve had generated his graphs using
SPSS, a proprietary, graphical user interface (GUI) software package that provides a limited menu of
options for the user. Leonard was working with R, an open-source, code-driven statistical package that
provides a vast array of options. These biostatisticians are properly considered to be experts in this
situation, as they are situated within a familiar context (Roth, 2003) wherein they produced the graphs.
      Because graphs summarize data by exploiting the human ability to reason spatially, readers notice
different things depending on how they read into its spatial landscape and how they read through the
lines, dots and labels to the laboratory setting from which the data came. In common with other
professionals, such as physicists gathered around chalkboards (Ochs, Jacoby & Gonzales, 1994), the
biostatisticians narrated and gestured as they created a liminal world that merged the interlocutors in the
lecture hall, Cartesian space and the laboratory setting. Such merged spaces are evocative of conceptual
blends (Fauconnier & Turner, 2002) for which graphs are potent material anchors, serving as a durable
organizer of information (Hutchins, 2005) and a common reference for interlocutors to attend to and
index by means of gesture (Williams, 2005). The purposes of this contrast are threefold. One, to simply
catalogue narrations around graphs in a technological setting not yet well investigated from this
perspective. Two, to briefly describe the liminal world of merged or blended spaces into which each
biostatistician invited listeners to follow. Three, to determine who can follow the story and who cannot in
order to illustrate how particular professional visions manifest in speech and gesture correspond to
conflicting views on the role of the biostatistician in medical research.

The SPSS Episode with Steve
      In this episode, Steve spoke about a graph depicting the weight of children compared to the
difference between the energy measures from two devices monitoring the metabolic activity of children
running on a treadmill: one, a closed chamber housed in the research facility (the "gold standard"), the
other a portable armband device or "sensor". See Figure 1: He placed the variables into the GUI, and then
invoked SPSS to produce the regression graph as output. To the right, a map depicts the words spoken in

                                                        790                                                   CSCL 2007
                                                                       armbandarmband
                                                                               overpredictsunderpredicts
synchrony with hand tracings (words in transcript in synchrony with gesture are underlined, tracings in
white in Figure 1). A member of the audience, "Brian" sometimes speaks as well.

 1 Steve   So, so this is our graph that we saw a significant correlation in. And here's the weight. And here's the
           difference between the, uh, armband and the chamber. So, above zero means that the armband overpredicts
           the energy expenditure. And here the armband underpredicts. So what, what conclusion would you make
           from that?
 2 Brian   The lighter you are the worse it works?
 3 Steve   The lighter you are the worse the armband works right? Mm hmm. And, and actually after a certain weight
           the arm band starts to=
 4 Brian   =Oh, yeah
 5 Steve   overpredict. And, and maybe this is because these, uh, children are more like adults and it's, it's working
           better here. In the lighter children it's really, uhm, it's really most off in, in the children who weigh less.

                                                                                              worse
                                                                                               the
                                                                                                  most
                                                                                                   off
                                                                                                                   working
                                                                                              and actually          better
                                                                                                                     here

                                                                                                 the lighteryou arehere's theweight
                                                                                               after a certain weight
 Figure 1. Reproductions of the GUI, the output graph and the marked up still frame from video.

         The graph is a scatter plot with a regression line (equation not shown) and 95% confidence
interval curves. Steve first highlighted the graph generally, each axis and the zero point on the ordinate
axis. It was not necessary to code these features because they were generally understood at the outset. He
then coded and highlighted regions where the armband overpredicts and where it underpredicts, thereby
entering a liminal world where armbands from the laboratory reside in Cartesian space in view of Steve
and his interlocutors. After Steve asked for conclusions (turn 1), Brian suggested a straightforward
interpretation: less weight, worse performance (turn 2), employing a personal pronoun, predicate structure
(Ochs, Jacoby & Gonzales, 1994) wherein the subject ("you") diminishes his weight as the armband
works progressively worse. Steve at first confirmed Brian's overall interpretation, borrowing the same
grammatical structure, but quickly disconfirmed Brian's suggestion in part, using his left hand as if to
emphatically slice through the graph from the zero point rightward until his hand reached the trend line
(turn 3). He thereby re-highlighted the zero point, coded and highlighted a zero-value horizontal line, and
reversed the direction of weight variation towards increasing values. Next, he coded "a certain weight" by
using his right hand as if to slice the horizontal axis at the 60 kg tick mark. This was a critical value after
which the armband will "overpredict" (sic, turn 5). I believe he meant to say, "underpredict". He then
recoded the armband reliability within this bottom right Cartesian space as "working better here" and
coded the upper left Cartesian space as the location where the armband is "most off" (turn 5).

The R Episode with Leonard
         Leonard has  stated often  that biostatisticians   should  interpret                for researchers  and  envisions a
future where researchers  in the   medical school    rely   on his department                 more. He  hopes   to offer them
sophisticated analyses that only highly trained biostatisticians can do. He advocates R as a substitute for

                                                        791                                                             CSCL 2007
others, pointedly singling out SPSS for its reliance on outdated or inappropriate statistical methods. But
few medical researchers can take the time to learn R, as it is not easily approachable to the statistical
novice, especially anyone unfamiliar with programming. Leonard's short course on regression modeling
was the setting for this episode, a retrospective analysis of passenger data on the Titanic. He posed the
problem of how to determine patterns of survival among passengers, treating age as the principal input
variable. He wrote out a single line of code, entered it and proceeded to talk about features of this loess
regression graph while using his computer cursor to index locations as he spoke. The following short
transcript is followed by a copy of the graph taken from the lecture notes (Figure 2).

       The next thing we're going to do is some non-parametric smoother. This is gonna relate age to
       survival and put a rug plot on that graph. So you see we have less data in the young people and
       we have a very steep age drop here. This is, uh, like a sixty-five percent survival, down to forty
       percent survival and then it gets to be kind of odd. This is, this is what confounding looks like. So
       these are people of different class and sex and we're mixing those all in. We don't account for that
       in this kind of plot. But we're starting to see at least overall, once you get to about age twenty,
       maybe that gets counted as an adult, but there's a lot of slope here saying there's no unique cut off
       for what is a child. It's just the closer you are to being an infant, you have a higher chance of
       getting put on the lifeboat. So now we're gonna start to stratify that.

 > plsmo(age, survived, datadensity=T)                      like a sixty-five percent survival

                                                                less data, young people,
                                                                steep age drop here,
                                                                no cut off

                                                  down to                          mixing in different class and
                                                  forty                            sex, what confounding looks
                                                  percent              cut         like
                                                  survival             off

 Figure 2. The R code (boxed above) used to generate the graph at left. At right are the areas he indexed.

      The graph is a loess regression plot with a dot near the curve for each person by age,
enigmatically depicting people as having survival probabilities intermediate between 0 and 1. Briefly put,
this is a difficult artifact to use as a material anchor for most medical researchers and arguably for many
biostatisticians as well. Leonard invited his audience to entertain (by means of computer cursor
movement) different locations where people reside within the Cartesian space. The liminal world at times
merges Cartesian space with a space not of people and boat, but filled with other such graphs, with many
possible graphical trends, some of which look like this undulating and "confounding" trend.

Distinctive Professional Visions
      We find in Steve's narrative an attempt to bring the experimental setting into Cartesian space in
order to teach researchers how to deploy SPSS outputs as interpretive tools. In contrast, though Leonard
does narrate liminal worlds uniting Cartesian space with the people on the Titanic, he also describes
places where "confounding" occurs, a space where only other biostatisticians can enter and only R can
help produce. Though these are only two short episodes, selected for purposes of contrasting similar
situations (biostatistical talk about regression graphs), they are representative of talk from each

                                                        792                                                     CSCL 2007
biostatistician over the hours of video gathered from each. Steve never creates spaces that medical
researchers cannot enter through Cartesian space, whereas Leonard often does so. Professional visions
differ where practice differs, especially where routine practice is under fire from reformers, as is certainly
the case in biostatistics (Sterne & Smith, 2001). These biostatisticians stand on opposite sides of the
controversy. Steve needs his clients to do most analysis by themselves and therefore needs for there to be
such a thing as routine analysis, a task for which the user-friendly SPSS is designed. Leonard advocates
more computationally intensive and more assumption-free approaches that have become increasingly
influential in the last twenty years but that entail dependence on biostatisticians for grants to be funded or
papers published. Each narrates stories that correspond to his understanding of how future work is to be
shared with clients. How experts narrate over Cartesian space reveals distinctive professional visions
(ways of seeing) that correspond to distinctive views on how professionals do the discipline. Close
analysis can be an effective tool for understanding technoscientific work practices, especially where
parallel information about participants' practice can be used to provide a broader picture.

References

Fauconnier, G., Turner, M. (2002). The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind's Hidden
      Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, New Series 96(3): 606-633.
Hutchins, E., (2005). Material anchors for conceptual blends. Journal of Pragmatics 37: 1555­1577.
Ochs, E., Jacoby, S., & Gonzales, P. (1994). Interpretative journeys: how physicists talk and travel
      through graphic space. Connections 1: 151-171.
Roth, W.-M. (2003). Toward an Anthropology of Graphing. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
      Academic Publishing.
Sterne, J., Smith, G. (2001). Sifting the evidence--what's wrong with significance tests? British Medical
      Journal, 322: 226­231.
Stevens, R. & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: learning to see in technoscience. In: Lampert M,
      Blunk ML, editors. Talking mathematics in school: studies of teaching and learning (p 107-149).
      Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Williams, R. (2005). Gesture as a Conceptual Mapping Tool. Paper presented at the 2005 meeting of the
      American Educational Research Association

Acknowledgments
Research reported in this article was supported by NSF grant REC-0337675 to Richard Lehrer, Leona Schauble, and
Rogers Hall.

                                                         793                                               CSCL 2007
