    Fostering Students' Participation in Face-to-Face Interactions and
 Deepening Their Understanding by Integrating Personal and Shared
                                                            Spaces
        Etsuji Yamaguchi, Faculty of Education and Culture, University of Miyazaki, etuji@cc.miyazaki-u.ac.jp
             Shigenori Inagaki, Faculty of Human Development, Kobe University, inagakis@kobe-u.ac.jp
Masanori Sugimoto, Department of Frontier Informatics, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo,
                                                   sugi@itl.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
        Fusako Kusunoki, Department of Information Design, Faculty of Art and Design, Tama Art University,
                                                   kusunoki@tamabi.ac.jp
Akiko Deguchi, Graduate School of Cultural Studies and Human Science, Kobe University, deguchia@kobe-u.ac.jp
Yuichiro Takeuchi, Department of Frontier Informatics, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo,
                                                  takeuchi@itl.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                                      Takao Seki, Fukui Prefectural School for the Deaf
              Sanae Tachibana, Midorigaoka Junior High School, Miki, Hyogo, CZS14613@nifty.ne.jp
       Tomokazu Yamamoto, Sumiyoshi Elementary School Attached to Faculty of Human Development, Kobe
                                         University, tyamamoto@fsm.h.kobe-u.ac.jp

          Abstract:    In this  research, we    introduced   CarettaKids     into  the  social  context  of   a classroom
          environment     to evaluate   whether   integration   of  personal    and  shared  spaces    can help    promote
          students'  participation  in  synchronous/co-located       interactions  in  the classroom    and deepen   their
          understanding of subject matter. Analysis of videotaped interactions and pre- and posttests clarified
          the following three points. (1) Students who used CarettaKids presented the simulation results and
          rules for  object  arrangement   they  worked     out individually    in their respective  personal   space,  by
          using  CarettaKids'    function    of projecting   object   arrangements     and  simulation     results from   a
          personal   digital assistant  onto a  sensing  board.   (2) Many    of   the students  who   used   CarettaKids
          examined     individually   generated   ideas  collaboratively     in  the   shared   space.  The    patterns  of
          collaborative examination are: (a) Induce a rule for object arrangement from object arrangements
          devised in personal spaces; (b) Deduce a new object arrangement from the rules discovered in the
          personal   spaces;    and (c)  Refine   the rules   discovered     in  the   personal  spaces    through   group
          discussion.   (3)  Students  who   used CarettaKids     not   only considered    all  of the  three  factors, i.e.
          residential area, industrial area and forest area, but also understood relations between these factors,
          thereby  deepening    their   understanding   of  city  planning   that  takes   environmental    and  financial
          aspects   into  consideration.     We   suggest    that   the  degree    to  which     students   deepen   their
          understanding is affected by the presence or absence of collaborative examination of individually
          generated ideas in the shared space.

INTRODUCTION
          In the  field of   computer   supported  collaborative     learning   (CSCL),    less research   has  been conducted    on
support  for synchronous/co-location      interaction   than on   support    for other  types   of interaction  (Lonchamp,      2006;
Scott,  Mandryk,     &  Inkpen,   2002).  However,    in   the  social   context   of  the classroom,    students   learn   not  only
individually, but also collaboratively while interacting face-to-face with the teacher and other students in the same
classroom. Therefore, while amplification of classroom learning is defined as the main agenda of the CSCL research
field,  working   more    actively  on   computer-mediated       support  for    synchronous/co-location       interaction   is more
necessary than ever before.

          Regarding    computer-mediated     support    for synchronous/co-location        interaction  in the  classroom,    several
systems for providing a socially shared space have been developed and evaluated (Suthers, 2006). One system has
been developed in which students input information by operating three-dimensional physical objects and the input
results are  superimposed     on   the  physical  objects   (Arias,  Eden,   &   Fisher,   1997).  This  system    not  only    allows
simultaneous input from about six users, but also can integrate the computer-supported shared space seamlessly with
the face-to-face  interaction   in  the classroom.  Because     of  these characteristics,  this   type of  system   helps   increase
students' feelings   of  being  immersed   in   collaborative   learning, while    promoting    shared  interaction  (Eden,     2002).
Furthermore,    this type    of system   can    support a   high   level  of collaborative     problem-solving     performance    by
elementary school students (Sugimoto, Kusunoki, Inagaki, Takatoki, & Yoshikawa, 2003).

                                                                 794                                                       CSCL 2007
         However, this type of system has two problems with respect to individual students' interaction in shared
space: (1)  Some    students do not  present  their own   ideas   in  the shared  space;  (2) The   ideas generated   by some
individuals are not   examined   by  others   in the  shared    space  (Fischer  &   Sugimoto,  2006).    These   problems  are
associated with a lack of feedback on individual ideas from other students, and are considered important causes of
inhibition  among    students  that  prevent   them   from      deepening  their   understanding    through  participation  in
collaborative problem-solving activities in the shared space. Once these problems are overcome, however, it will be
possible to add a new advantage to the existing system (i.e. support for individual cognition), without impairing its
existing advantage (i.e. support for group cognition).

         By using hand-held devices, we have attempted to create a personal space in which individual students can
work without being disturbed by other students, and to integrate individual personal spaces into the existing shared
space. The  approach    to creating a   personal space   using   a hand-held    device has  been  attempted    in other  CSCL
research projects,  achieving  some   positive   results (e.g., Iles, Glaser,   Kam, &   Canny, 2002;   Roschelle,  Rosas,  &
Nussbaum, 2005).

         We   have  developed   a system     called CarettaKids    (Deguchi,    Yamaguchi,    Inagaki, Sugimoto,    Kusunoki,
Tachibana, Yamamoto, Seki, & Takeuchi, 2006; Sugimoto, Hosoi, & Hashizume, 2004). This system uses a sensing
board based on the radio frequency identification (RFID) technology to support collaboration in a shared space, and
a personal  digital assistant (PDA)   device  to support   activity   in personal spaces. This  system    enables students, in
collaboration with one another, to simulate city planning with consideration of environmental and financial aspects.
However,   no  evaluation  has  been  conducted   on  the  effectiveness   of   CarettaKids in  the classroom   setting. More
specifically, it has not yet been evaluated whether CarettaKids is effective in supporting students' generation of ideas
and careful examination of others' ideas in the shared spaces and deepening the understanding of individual students.

RESEARCH QUESTION
         Our study aimed to answer three research questions. (1) Were the students who used CarettaKids able to
propose  ideas  in  the shared  space   that they   had  generated    in  their personal space?  (2)   Did  the students  who
collaboratively used CarettaKids examine the individual proposed ideas in the shared space? (3) Were the students
who used CarettaKids able to deepen their understanding of city planning that concerns environmental and financial
aspects?

METHOD
Participants
         The curriculum that used CarettaKids was implemented in a sixth-grade class (33 students aged 11 to 12
years) in a university-affiliated elementary school in Japan. The class was divided into six groups (Groups 1­6), each
comprising five or six students. Each group was provided with one set of the system. None of the students had used
the system before. One of the authors was the teacher. She had more than 10 years teaching experience and had
knowledge in science education and biology at bachelor's degree level participated. All the other authors participated
in the class for purposes of data collection and technical support.

Curriculum
         The curriculum was designed for creating the situations that allow students to move seamlessly between the
two spaces using CarettaKids. So, three types of activity (shared-space, personal-space, and mixed-space learning)
were included   in  the curriculum. And   the  curriculum   was   designed  for  creating the  situations that  allow students
generate ideas  and  examine    others' ideas using   CarettaKids.    So,  the  learning cycles consisted   of  three types of
activity were repeated several times and the inter-group interaction activity was included in the curriculum.

Data sources, measures, and analyses
         Regarding the evaluation methods for answering the three research questions, for Questions (1) and (2), the
interaction analysis (Jourdan & Henderson, 1995) was used to analyze videotaped records of the students' classroom
activities; and for Question (3), pre- and posttest analyses were conducted.

RESULTS
         Analysis of videotaped interactions and pre- and posttests showed three main findings. (1) Students who
used CarettaKids presented the simulation results and rules for object arrangement they worked out individually in

                                                              795                                                    CSCL 2007
their respective   personal  space,   by  using CarettaKids'   function  of  projecting object   arrangements    and  simulation
results on the PDA onto the sensing board. (2) Many of the students who used CarettaKids examined individually
generated ideas collaboratively in the shared space. The patterns of collaborative examination are: (a) Induce a rule
for   object arrangement     from   object  arrangements     devised  in   the personal    spaces;  (b) Deduce    a   new  object
arrangement    from  the rules   discovered  in the  personal  spaces;   and (c) Refine the   rules discovered   in the   personal
spaces through group discussion. (3) Students who used CarettaKids not only considered all of the three factors, i.e.
residential  area,  industrial  area   and  forest   area, but also  understood    relations  between    these   factors, thereby
deepening their understanding of city planning by taking environmental and financial aspects into consideration. We
suggest   that the degree    to which    students deepen   their understanding   is  affected by    the presence  or  absence    of
collaborative examination of individually generated ideas.

REFERENCES
Arias, E.  G.,   Eden,  H.,  &  Fischer,  G. (1997).   Enhancing    communication,     facilitating shared  understanding,    and
          creating  better   artifacts by  integrating   physical   and  computational     media   for  design.  Proceedings     of
          Designing Interactive Systems (DIS '97), ACM, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1-12.
Deguchi, A., Yamaguchi, E., Inagaki, S., Sugimoto, M., Kusunoki, F., Tachibana, S., Yamamoto, T., Seki, T., and
          Takeuchi, Y. (2006). CarettaKids: A system for supporting children's face-to-face collaborative learning by
          integrating   personal   and   shared spaces.    Proceedings  of the 5th  International   Conference    for Interaction
          Design and Children, Tampere, Finland, 45­48.
Eden,  H. (2002).   Getting   in on   the (inter)action:   Exploring affordances   for collaborative    learning in a context    of
          informed participation. Proceedings of CSCL 2002, 399-407.
Fischer, G. & Sugimoto, M. (2006). Supporting self-directed learners and learning communities with sociotechnical
          environments. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(1), 31­64.
Iles, A., Glaser,   D.,  Kam,   M.,   &   Canny,  J. (2002).   Learning  via   distributed dialogue:    Livenotes   and handheld
          wireless technology. Proceedings of CSCL 2002, 408­417.
Jordan, B.,  &    Henderson,    B. (1995).  Interaction  analysis:  Foundations   and  practice.  The   Journal  of the Learning
          Sciences, 4(1), 39-103.
Lonchamp,      J. (2006).   Supporting     synchronous     collaborative   learning: A   generic,   multi-dimensional      model.
          International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(2), 247­276.
Moher,  T.,  Kim,   J.,  &  Haas,  D.  (2002).  A  two-tiered  collaborative   design  for observational   science    activities in
          simulated environments. Proceedings of CSCL 2002, 361­370.
Roschelle,   J.,  Rosas, R., &   Nussbaum,    M.   (2005).  Towards    a design  framework    for   mobile  computer-supported
          collaborative     learning.  In T. Koschmann,       D.  Suthers    &  T.  W.  Chan,    (Eds.),   Computer     supported
          collaborative     learning   2005: The     next  10  years!    (pp.520­524).  Mahwah,        NJ: Lawrence       Erlbaum
          Associates.
Scott, S. D., Mandryk, R. L., & Inkpen, K. M. (2002). Understanding children's interactions in synchronous shared
          environments. Proceedings of CSCL 2002, 333­341.
Stanton, D., Neale, H., & Bayon, V. (2002). Interfaces to support children's co-present collaboration: Multiple mice
          and tangible technologies. Proceedings of CSCL 2002, 342­351.
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL.
          International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315­337.
Sugimoto, M., Hosoi, K., & Hashizume, H. (2004). Caretta: A system for supporting face-to-face collaboration by
          integrating personal and shared spaces. Proceedings of ACM CHI2004, Vienna, Austria, 41­48.
Sugimoto, M., Kusunoki, F., Inagaki, S., Takatoki, K., & Yoshikawa, A. (2003). EPRO2: Design of a system and a
          curriculum to support group learning for school children. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen, & U. Hoppe (eds.),
          Designing     for change    in  networked  learning    environments:   Proceedings   of   the  Computer     Support    for
          Collaborative Learning 2003 (pp.1­6). The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
          This research project has been supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) (No. 16300248) and
(A) (No. 18200048).

                                                                796                                                     CSCL 2007
