 Understanding Classroom Culture Through a Theory of Dialogism:
         What Happens When Cheating and Collaboration Collide?

 Sarita Yardi, Georgia Institute of Technology, 85 5th Street NW, Atlanta GA 30332-0760, yardi@cc.gatech.edu
Dan Perkel, University of California, Berkeley, 102 South Hall, Berkeley CA 94720, dperkel@ischool.berkeley.edu

         Abstract: We consider tensions between collaboration, ownership, and appropriation in relation
         to Mikhail Bakhtin's theory of dialogism. We analyze examples of these tensions from our own
         research  in an   after-school, design  research program   and   relate  them  to findings   from  other
         research that explored using collaborative learning systems in classrooms. We apply dialogism to
         describe factors that contribute to students' perception of these classroom experiences as ones that
         do or do not foster collaboration, including the culture of the classroom, the affordances of the
         technologies  used  to mediate    collaboration, and   the role  of multivocality    in the classroom.
         Students  are using, reusing,   and   appropriating media  in   creative ways  outside  of  their school
         settings while teachers are increasingly incorporating related emerging technologies such as wikis,
         blogs, and   chat rooms  into   their classrooms.   By understanding     the factors that  contribute to
         dialogism, educators will be better equipped to create classroom cultures and design environments
         to encourage collaboration among students.

Introduction
         Youth  are actively  and enthusiastically  creating  and   producing digital  content   in their online computer
mediated environments. Recent studies have shown that 57% of teenagers have created a blog or webpage, posted
original artwork, photography, stories or videos online, or remixed online content into their own new creations, 33%
have shared   what  they create online   with  others, and   19%  have   created  new  works   by   remixing  content they
appropriated  from  another source  (Lenhart    &  Madden,   2005). While    youth  are freely   engaging  in activities of
content creation, media use, reuse, and remixing, the interplay of these practices and behaviors within the context of
their schooling environments is more complex. Students' culture of sharing, copying, and pasting media in their
daily informal practices online often lies in contradiction to the notions of plagiarism, stealing, and cheating that
have been instilled in them within their classrooms. Even though culturally accepted literary masterpieces such as
the Odyssey, the Iliad, Mort d'Arthur,    the Sistine Chapel, and various works by Shakespeare are the products of
appropriated and remixed content (Jenkins et al., 2006), students' online practices of remixing through blogging,
manipulating images, audio remixing, making digital movies, and creating customized game modifications may be
less well accepted in classroom environments.

         Social communication sites on the web like MySpace, Facebook, and Wikipedia are rapidly growing in
popularity. This growth, in combination with the increasingly globalized socially networked information economy,
indicates a need for researchers, teachers, parents, and policy makers to better understand the influence of these
media and activities on the changing dynamics of classroom collaborative culture. In this paper, we discuss the
tensions that occur   between remix   culture  and classroom    culture, focusing  on new  media    and   computer science
environments in particular. Our use of the term new media, in this context, refers to the many technologies and
online environments that students use in their daily lives, including blogs, wikis, chat rooms, instant messaging,
social networking sites, as well as their use of cell phones and handheld mobile devices. We highlight examples
from our research which reveal how these contradictions played out in students' informal learning environments.
We then apply Mikhael Bakhtin's theory of dialogism as a framework through which to address these tensions in
order to design a culture of collaboration in classroom learning environments.

Collaboration or Cheating?
         Researchers in CSCL have described ways in which the creation of artifacts such as words, texts, images,
sound, and video can contribute to the collaborative knowledge construction process (Stahl, 2003; Suthers, 2005).
One theory of learning that is used to describe this process is constructivism, which describes the importance of
deriving meaning   through  learners' interactions  with  their environments  (Piaget,   1976).  Constructivism    helps to
explain how learning occurs through appropriation as the assimilation of concepts within a learner's internal mental
processes of making knowledge his or her own. However, its intention was not to explicate appropriation as the
borrowing, reusing, or incorporation of others' ideas and tangible artifacts during a learner's actual processes of

                                                           797                                                   CSCL 2007
construction (Ackermann, 2004). In describing the nature of communication, Bakhtin describes all communication
as consisting of continual acts of appropriation in the latter sense: "The word in language is half someone else's. It
becomes    `one's  own'  only  when   the speaker   populates   it  with his  intention,  with  his own    accent,  when  he
appropriates the word, adapting it to his own semantic and expressive intention" (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 293). In the first
use, constructivist  learning through  appropriation   is encouraged.    In  the second   use, in the context   of Bakhtin's
definition, appropriation can   imply  copying,  plagiarism,  stealing,  or  cheating,  even   when   used  in the  way  that
Bakhtin intended.

          The dichotomies between these two interpretations of appropriation can lead to contradictory perceptions of
what rules should guide their use of new media in the classroom. The historical transmission view of learning that
has dominated classroom practice views dialogue as a one-way interaction (Heap, 1985). Knowledge is imparted
from the teacher to the class, and students then apply that knowledge through the practice of "question, answer,
evaluation,"   which Lemke    (1990) referred to   as the Triadic   Dialogue.    Appropriation  enters   into  the mix when
students   are encouraged  to   dissect, transform,   and  share   artifacts and  ideas   as part  of their   individual and
collaborative learning processes. While part of the learner's process is to make content personally meaningful, what
are the implications when a personally meaningful artifact, in fact, belongs to another person? In other words, what
are the boundaries that define copying an idea versus copying an expressive form (1)? Researchers in computer
science education have long questioned the role of collaboration in assignments, looking to understand at what point
collaboration ends and plagiarism or cheating begins (Stewart-Gardiner et al., 2001; Sheard et al., 2002; Harris,
1994; Roberts, 2002). When should teachers encourage students to collaborate? Should the students discuss the
ownership of that code? If ownership is not properly acknowledged or attributed, are they cheating? Where does the
line fall between   collaboration and  cheating?   In the following  section   we  describe    examples   from  our  research
which reveal how these questions emerged.

Backyard Transformations: A Case Study
          We conducted a two-month, after-school program at a local public school as design research. Our goal was
to determine requirements for an online, collaborative storytelling environment to help youth learn principles of
non-linear, narrative construction using multiple digital and physical expressive media. Storytelling is a valuable
educational activity through which learners explore and make sense of the world around them.              The story creation
process   involves  developing  ideas,   acquiring  understanding,   and     constructing knowledge      through   personally
meaningful forms of self-expression. Recent projects have looked to design interactive storytelling environments to
support the creation, production, consumption, and sharing of stories (e.g. Antle, 2003; Benford et al., 2000; Cassell
and Ryokai, 2001). In our study, we conducted hour and a half long sessions, twice a week, at the school's computer
lab (see Figure 1). We provided four Apple Mac OS X desktops in addition to the school's lab machines.             The study
involved eight fifth-grade students, five boys and three girls, and a team of five researchers (2). Our lead researcher
ran  each  session, with support  from   the other  researchers,   who   played  the interchangeable     roles of  participant
observer, note-taker, videographer, and teaching assistant. We videotaped all the sessions and conducted interviews
with the participants to better understand their use of digital media in their everyday lives outside of school.

                                  Figure 1. Backyard Transformations sessions.

          We designed the curriculum to teach fundamental storytelling concepts, with each session focused on a
particular  theme,  such  as  non-linear  narration   or  character development.     Our  curriculum     was   modeled   after
Backyard    Transformations,  a narrative  story construction   research  project  conducted    by  Jill Wright   and Rachel
Strickland at Apple Computer's Vivarium Research Lab from 1988-1991 (Strickland, 1991; Strickland & Wright,

                                                            798                                                     CSCL 2007
1990). They had filmed 174 video clips and had created a corresponding set of printed cards to be used as prototypes
for storytelling games. Their scenes were designed to encourage children's imagination and play through evocative
and unusual character scenes. We pre-installed the video clips into Apple iMovie at each station and also explored
using alternative digital tools such as Comic Creator, and FlashCan Animator (see Figure 2).

    Figure 2. Comic Creator, FlashCan Animator, and iMovie with Backyard Transformations clip.

       In addition, we provided participants with a disposable camera, their "Personal Card Creator," which they
could use to take pictures outside of our sessions. We also provided a digital camera and video camera available for
their use during each session. We encouraged them to incorporate drawings, paintings, photographs, and whiteboard
sketches into their stories. Our activities ranged from highly structured, such as "extension of process of description
to include techniques of association and relationship," in which participants were dealt fifteen cards and had two
minutes to sort them into three categories of their own choosing, to highly unstructured, such as their final project, in
which they created a complete digital story using media of their choice. Our activities fostered a culture that strongly
encouraged  media reuse and sharing, however, we       did not attempt  to establish  any  norms or  rules for sharing,
attributing ownership, or claiming ideas, artifacts, and stories as one's own. We thus observed that the participants
struggled with a  sense of  uncertainty throughout      their  evolving  storytelling processes.  In our    storytelling
environment, who  "owned"  the  components within      their  story sequences? In the  next sections we    illustrate the
tensions that arose as participants appropriated and re-used each other's ideas in their own storytelling. Then, in the
second half of the paper, we reintroduce Bakhtin's notion of dialogism as a way of resolving these tensions and
thinking about the future of collaborative learning.

The "Creation" of Count Whistleboy: An Example of Appropriation
       In the Backyard Tranformations card deck, a series of cards were made using the same "character."        In one
episode, Andrew came up with "Jackie, the Sumo Wrestler" from a card depicting a character its creators called
"The Umpire."  He also pointed out another card in his pile with The Umpire in shadows, which he described as
"Count Dracula with a whistle." Toby then noticed that Jason had a similar card with the Umpire character, which
he proceeded to describe during his presentation to the group (see Figure 3). During his presentation of "Count
Whistleboy" Toby had appropriated Andrew's idea for a "Count Dracula with a whistle" and conflated it with the
card in Jason's pile which contained a small person looking up with a whistle in its mouth.

       TOBY: This is a human.    His name is Count Whistleboy.       He is ten years old. He is ten inches tall. ...
       And um it dislikes the ... the dark... the moon the most because it goes "raar" and becomes a
       vampire. And um... and um... his friends are his whistles.

               Figure 3. Images from "The Umpire" cards that became Count Whistleboy.

                                                          799                                                 CSCL 2007
         Throughout the course of the project there were other types of acts of appropriation. For example, Dionne
created a story using a photograph of a cat that Iris had taken. Although Iris did not explicitly object to this use, did
Dionne's act carry the same implications as the creation of Count Whisteleboy? When was borrowing from a peer
collaborating and when was it stealing?

You Stole My Idea!
         Participants preferred to collaborate during the idea generation process, often struggling to produce ideas
on their own. For example:

         RESEARCHER: What do you like about working with other kids?
         ANDREW: I think it would go faster if I worked by myself but Miguel has some good ideas....
         Miguel watches a lot of TV and gets good ideas from TV. There's a lot of good ideas on TV.
         IRIS: Giving me some ideas.    Ideas are basically like all you need.
         MIGUEL: I like working with other people better `cause usually I don't have all the ideas and other
         people can help.

However, while they sought out their peers and other external resources for ideas, they also expressed a desire to be
given credit for ideas that were used by others.    Following the Toby's creation of Count Whistleboy, Jason also
decided to use the character in his own story, leading to confusion as to who "owned" the character.

         JASON: Wait, did you do Count Whistleboy or did you? [pointing first to Toby and then to Andrew]
         TOBY: I did Count Whistleboy.
         ANDREW: So did I.

Andrew initially showed little interest in Toby's use of the Count Whistleboy character, even though the character's
visual appearance was modeled after his own Sumo Wrestler. However, Andrew's "so did I" in response to Toby's
claim that it was his character indicates that he did in fact want to be given credit for his ideas. Toby did not object
to this joint ownership and responded     with  a light-hearted  expression of acceptance towards     Jason's use. Their
shared use of Count Whistleboy highlighted the important social aspects of building on and reusing one another's
ideas as part of the development of group identity in their collaborative learning processes. However, not every
conflict of ownership resolved without open conflict.      In other instances, we heard comments such as "Hey, you
stole my idea!" or "That was my idea!"    In the following episode, Toby presented his story in iMovie to the group.

         TOBY:   This is Madame Peacock.
         JASON:     He stole the idea He stole the idea!
         TOBY:    She's crawling because she has no feet.    How do I know?    I can't see her feet. She is 13
         years old. She is small as a squirrel. It lives in a wooden house. Its favorite thing to do is hunt the
         Invisible Woman. ... Their greatest hope is to destroy the Invisible Woman.
         JASON: [under his breath]     Oh come on. [reaches across the table and points at the screen]  He stole
         that. [points finger in Toby's face]  You stole that!

The conflict was resolved when one of the researchers played a mediating role:

         RESEARCHER: [to Toby?] You stole that?
         TOBY: [giggle in acknowledgement]
         RESEARCHER: Well, I like it.
         JASON: Yes. That was my narrative movie thing.
         RESEARCHER: Well, I think that's a really good idea.       Madame Peacock who chases the Invisible
         Woman... that's your character right?
         JASON: Yeah... well, that's his character [referring to the Invisible Woman]
         RESEARCHER [later, in the background talking to Jason] People use each other's characters all the
         time.  It's not a bad thing.  It's a good thing.

                                                            800                                                CSCL 2007
        In this situation, Jason was less concerned that Toby had used the character of Madame Peacock and more
concerned that he hadn't received credit for it.. In both stories, while tensions quickly dissipated when the "owner"
was given public acknowledgement for his or her idea, character, or artifact, at the same time, their interactions
brought to light the potential sources of complexity and confusion regarding the proper uses of shared artifacts. How
should these practices, which are simultaneously individual and collaborative, be understood when the rules behind
the sharing of ideas and artifacts are subtle or unclear?     These examples both illustrate how the tensions played out
in the classroom, but also point to a potential solution by suggesting a different lens for thinking about collaboration
in the classroom that explicitly recognizes and appreciates acts of appropriation.

Dialogism in the Classroom
        Bakhtin's     theory   of dialogism   provides   a  framework      through  which   to   understand   the   culture  of
collaboration within learning environments. In particular, the perceived dialogic nature of a medium and how it is
used in the classroom correlates to whether students will be inclined to use it collaboratively or individually. We use
a  definition of  dialogue  as  consisting of   one  or more    speakers,  listeners, and  the  relationships  between   them
(Bakhtin, 1981). Bakhtin (1986) used the term "utterances" to describe the situated act of dialogic discourse as a unit
of analysis. Utterances begin and end with changes of speaker and they can only be defined in relation to other
utterances. Each speaker's utterance "carries echoes" of the previous one as she appropriates and assimilates it into
her own speech.    We thus characterize dialogue as the inscriptions, implications, and intersections that accompany
words, texts, gestures, intonations, voices, responses, and other communication utterances as they are interpreted
and appropriated. While others have described the nature of dialogue as it occurs between man and machine (e.g.,
Meadow, 1970), we focus on dialogue as it takes place between man and man, where the machine is the mediating
agent among two or more humans.

        CSCL      researchers   have  applied   various dialogic   theories   to describe   processes   of  meaning-making,
knowledge building, language acquisition, and teaching thinking (Koschmann, 1999; Wegerif, in press; Roschelle,
1996; Wells, 2006; Wegerif, 2005). For example, Koschmann (1999), noting Werstch's (1998) prior work argues
"utterances   are not analyzable   in isolation but  must  be   studied instead  with  reference   to  the culturally-supplied
mediational   structures of    which they are   instantiations.   Learning thus  involves   the  process   of multiple  voices
coming into contact, both within and across speaker-produced utterances." We draw from these studies to support
our argument that increasing dialogism in collaborative learning environments can enhance students' knowledge
construction processes. As noted by Bereiter:

        "Classroom     discussions    may  be   thought  of   as  part of  the larger  ongoing   discourse,   not   as
        preparation    for  it or as  after-the-fact examination   of  the results  of the  larger discourse...    The
        important thing is that the local discourses be progressive in the sense that understandings are
        being     generated  that are new  to   the  local participants   and  that the   participants recognize    as
        superior to their previous understandings" (1994, p. 9).

        In this paper, we do not look to analyze the types of learning and knowledge construction that occurred
within our case study (although there is much more to be explored there). Instead, as prior scholars of Bakhtin have
done (e.g., Kozulin, 1996), we extend and generalize Bakhtin's theory of dialogism in text and language to apply it
to multiple   modes   of communication     that are  used  in the classroom,   such    as audio, video,    verbal, spatial, and
gestural. While dialogic theory is relevant across a range of academic environments, for the sake of clarity, we focus
primarily on its intersections within computer science and emerging new media. The following sections describe
three factors that influence dialogism in the classroom that stood out as we considered our project in relation to other
work and to Bakhtin's theory: dialogism through culture, dialogism through technical affordances, and dialogism
through multivocality. We conclude with recommendations for designing collaborative classroom activities based on
these three factors.

Dialogism through Culture
        While students negotiate their common sets of rules, standards, and norms in their everyday interactions
using online media, when in more structured learning environments, they look to teachers for direction and guidance
in establishing these norms. At times, students' expectations of a particular environment can clash with teachers'
expectations.  For example, Guzdial et al. (2002) found that faculty attitudes and models of collaboration presented a
cultural barrier to collaboration. Additionally, when they introduced software to facilitate collaboration, students

                                                              801                                                    CSCL 2007
from  different  disciplines   had different  experiences      based on    the  culture   within their  discipline.   Their  findings
supported   those of    Cohen   (1994)   who   argued     that students    who   perceive   only  one   answer     will  not seek to
collaborate, while open-ended and less structured assignments will encourage collaboration. Guzdial et al. found that
students from computer sciences, who were used to grades based on individual coding assignments, resisted using
CoWeb while students in architectural design, who were used to formal and informal dialogues, actively adopted the
collaborative opportunities that were provided. CoWeb was successful when dialogue was a part of the disciplinary
culture. "If the culture of the context is not compatible, the medium will not succeed" (Rick & Guzdial, 2006).

         In our study, we generally did not seek to explicitly address or define rules for appropriation, although the
example of Jason, Toby, and the conflict of Madame Peacock discussed above points to one exception. Additionally,
we  recognize    that the way   in   which  we   structured    our  activities  may    have nurtured   this  conflict   between  our
participants and their expectations in our project. In the case of Toby's use of Madame Peacock, the researcher
intentionally chose   a  strategy  to resolve   the tension    that  would     not be  critical towards  Toby's     use  of  Madame
Peacock, but would still ease Jason's anxiety by acknowledging the role that he played in the character's creation.
This compromise, in a sense, reflects the tension in our own roles the classroom. From one perspective, we played
the role of teachers assigning them tasks within the familiar context of their school's computer lab which normally
followed  traditional   classroom    rules and   structures.   However,    from    the other    perspective, we     were researchers
running an after school program that was designed to encourage non-traditional explorations into creative media use.
The participants therefore may have experienced conflicting notions of collaboration in the storytelling environment.

         In this  case,  we    might have   avoided  conflict   and  tensions    regarding  ownership    by  explicitly    specifying
rules and clarifying    expectations  to   avoid potential     misunderstandings.     Many    incidents of   cheating   in  computer
science courses have been due to the differences in awareness and expectations between students and teachers. If
students  perceive    a clearly    defined  culture    of dialogism,    they    will   be better  prepared      to  determine  when
collaboration is or is not encouraged.

Dialogism through Technical Affordances
         The technical and material affordances of media influence the extent to which students perceive it to be
collaborative in  nature.   For  example,   the  interactions   between     Toby,    Andrew,    and   Jason  in their use   of Count
Whistleboy were undoubtedly aided by each of their abilities to pick up and physically manipulate the playing cards,
point to cards in each other's piles, and place cards next to each other. Affordances of new media provide other
these as well as many other novel opportunities for collaboration.

         The potential of using of new media in schools is not a new discussion and its limitations in the classroom
have been addressed within the field of CSCL. Researchers have long warned about the dangers of technological
determinism caused by blindly introducing a medium into the classroom without considering its limitations (e.g.,
Pea, 1987). For example, new media environments such as distance learning and one-way communication tools like
audio and video broadcasting were touted as powerful new tools for learning in the classroom. However, they also
required substantial interactional structures through which to establish common ground and enable transformative
communication     rather  than  just transmissional    communication        (Pea,   1994,  p.   291). CSCL   thus   emphasizes    the
importance    of considering    how   the   medium     is implemented       in   the  classroom   based  on     its constraints  and
affordances.  Dialogism     is not embedded     in the  medium      itself but  instead   emerges   through  the    specific ways in
which the medium is implemented and used within the learning environment.

         Some educational software environments have been explicitly designed to encourage collaborative learning
through carefully constructed uses of the medium's technical affordances. For example, DIVER is a "cultural remix
tool for web video" that fosters "point of view" authoring for sharing, collaboration, and knowledge building around
a common ground (Zahn et al., 2005). WebDIVER is an online version that allows DIVERs to upload a DIVE and
share it with others who can then comment on the DIVE (see Figure 5). Through this process of "guided noticing"
one participant   guides  the   interaction and    the other   receives    it. Although   such   prescribed  roles   will  inevitably
experience fluidity and an interweaving across boundaries during the collaborative knowledge construction process,
the structure offered by the system provides an explicit and direct sense of ownership based on who is doing the
guiding  and  who  is   the participant.   Another  example     is Scardamalia     and  Bereiter's    (1994) Computer      Supported
Intentional Learning Environments (CSILE). In CSILE, anyone can add a comment to a note but only authors can
edit or delete notes (see Figure 5). The sense of ownership of a particular note is therefore made explicit. To copy a
note and use it as one's own would be equated to stealing or cheating.

                                                                 802                                                        CSCL 2007
                  Figure 5. Guided noticing in WebDIVER and author edit box in CSILE.

Dialogism through Multivocality
         The third important factor in designing for dialogism is multivocality. Multivocality is defined by Bakhtin
as the ways in  which  multiple    voices can be discerned     in a text  (Bakhtin,  1981). The  role of  multivocality in
collaborative learning spaces is less clearly understood in these emerging new mediums. What happens when there
are multiple voices, listeners, and possible interpretations in a given utterance? What implications, if any, does the
speaker's original ownership have as the utterance evolves through multiple dynamic and untraceable states? In our
study, for example, Miguel discovered a built-in sound pattern in iMovie and proudly maximized the volume to
broadcast his find to the computer lab. Toby crossed the room to see the sound source and promptly incorporated it
into his own story (see Figure 6).

         According to Bakhtin, "Language is not a neutral medium that passes freely and easily into the private
property of the speaker's intentions; it is populated­overpopulated­with the intentions of others" (1981, p. 294).
One of the challenges we faced was that, in contrast to text and language, which offer a more binary distinction
between speaker and listener (although of course they are not always explicitly delineated), the boundaries are less
obvious when the utterance continues to be used and reused beyond the speaker's original intention, as was the case
in our multimedia    environments.   Multiple  layers   of meaning     are added    and interwoven    as  the utterance  is
appropriated throughout its lifecycle. Perhaps the sender's original message remains embedded somewhere in the
medium but it will become convoluted and masked over time. The ability for messages to be mediated through both
the students and the medium can influence the ways in which its dialogism evolves. What are the roles of the sender
and receiver within these mediums?

         Miguel's re-broadcast of his iMovie tune throughout the lab is a type of "indirect speech," which Wertsch
& Toma (1995) describe as instances in which speakers incorporated text from prior talk. They discuss examples of
indirect speech in their analysis of fifth grade students' discussion of a balance beam experiment:

         "It is reasonable to expect that when the dialogic function is dominant in classroom discourse,
         pupils will treat their utterances and those of others as thinking devices.   Instead of accepting them
         as information to be received, encoded, and stored, they will take an active stance toward them by
         questioning and extending    them,   by incorporating     them   into their own  external  and   internal
         utterances, and so forth" (p. 171).

         Because the students are actively interpreting these utterances, the boundary between speaker and listener­
and unanticipated future listeners­is  not   clearly demarcated.    It is instead an   inclusive dialogic space   in  which
multiple forces mutually construct and re-construct one another. Wegerif (in press) argues that "any sign taken to be
a mediation between self and other, a word or a facial expression, must pre-suppose the prior opening of a space of
dialogue within which  such a sign   can   be taken  to mean     something."   Similar to Wegerif's   description  of these
meaningful  signs in dialogic spaces,     we  found  that  the   affordances of  audio  and  video  mediums    can   enable
"shoulder-to-shoulder collaboration" (Benford, 2005), even when participants are spatially located across the room
from one another, as was the case with Miguel's broadcast. Thus, the implementation of the media and the multiple
voices it may contain, which are also fluid and can evolve dynamically over time, will influence the ways in which
the students choose to use it in their collaborative activities.

                                                           803                                                   CSCL 2007
                 Figure 6. Examples of multivocality in Backyard Transformation activities.

Dialogism Out of the Classroom
          Many of today's new media technologies are highly social in nature. These environments, such as MySpace
and YouTube, have multiple social and communicative characteristics. For example, the explicit culture of sharing
in YouTube    is conveyed  through    the URL   and  Embed    links that are prominently     displayed  next  to each   video
segment,   in which    embedding    linking  can  be  explicitly  enabled  or disabled     (see Figure    4). This   external
representation enables a fluid interaction through a shared understanding among users. It is made clear that new
content can be shared by others who are free to adapt and appropriate the material to generate their own meanings.
These  features  are designed   to be  used by  multiple  parties who    contribute to  or participate   in the  community,
whether as active contributors, readers, or lurkers. Technical features like linking, tagging, and commenting can help
to create a culture of dialogism within the software environment.

                                   Figure 4. YouTube URL and Embed features.

          Although   the contexts  of use of  the environments    we have  discussed,   from    digital storytelling tools  to
online social communication     sites to  educational software,  differ  significantly, there are  common     threads  across
them as dialogic mediums. It is useful to ground our discussion of these varied learning environments by describing
them in terms of categories of genres. Bakhtin described speech genres as characteristic patterns of speech within
the realms of dialogue and text , which can vary from simple forms such as greetings, farewells, congratulations, or
information about health, to more complex forms such as novels, dramas, or scientific research (Bakhtin, 1986, p.
69).  Again, we extend Bakhtin's theory to describe various modes of dialogue across multiple media. If a software
coding environment in computer science is consistently perceived to be a dialogic genre, the technical affordances
that are core properties of that genre can convey to the student how it should be used, according to the designers of
the software. Embedded features such as "publish my code to the class" or "download module from group" can help
the students to perceive their actions using these features as collaborative, rather than cheating, as they engage in a
dialog   with the  software   designers   through    the medium.     Koschmann      (1999)   states  that   this "involve[s]
understanding not only the degree to which learners appropriate particular genres... but also the degree to which the
genres themselves afford opportunities for the expression of the multivocal aspects of learner-produced utterances."
The genre might provide the option for students to associate their name to a section of code­their "utterance"­in
order  to maintain   a sense of individual   ownership   within  the group's  final artifact. If   the  authorship   option is
disabled, students will be made aware that their code contribution will be incorporated into a group-owned artifact
that may not acknowledge individual ownership. In each of these examples, if the teacher can control these types of
features  by  enabling or disabling   options during  certain phases  of  students' projects,   the students    will be more
clearly cued into the extent of the dialogic, and accordingly, the collaborative, nature of their activities.

Conclusion
          Many   schools  and universities  are actively  designing  innovative teaching     pedagogies     and  curricula  by
applying new media to traditional academic disciplines. For example, Harvard Law School is teaching its Law in the
Court  of Public  Opinion  course   in an  online 3D  virtual world   called  Second    Life  (3), the  Georgia  Institute  of

                                                            804                                                      CSCL 2007
Technology is teaching computer science through an innovative media computation undergraduate course (4), and
Byrd Middle School is teaching medieval history through a MySpace-like socially networked blog (5). This paper
contributes an alternative perspective for designing and analyzing collaborative learning environments through the
framework      of dialogism.  At  the same   time we   explored      open questions about  the framework's   applications   in
emerging mediums.

           We propose that educators and designers can construct collaborative learning environments by considering
the interdependent issues of culture, affordances, and multivocality through the lens of dialogism. These insights can
help enable researchers in CSCL to guide students to make more informed and educated decisions in their individual
and collaborative activities. Given the growing ubiquity of new media as a part of students' lives outside of school
and the increasing use of these technologies as a part of classroom activities, we need to teach students the skills for
developing digital literacies and critical reflection. As they transition into today's media rich, globally networked
professional economy, they will need to understand the implications of sharing, collaboration, ownership, credit­and
cheating­in these emerging interwoven environments of their everyday lives.

Endnotes
(1)  The question of the implications of copyright issues and the division between transformation of a work versus simple
     derivation of a work is an important, but separate, discussion.
(2)  Pseudonyms are used to protect the identity of the participants. All media is reproduced with the consent of the participants
     and their parent(s).
(3)  http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/cyberone/
(4)  http://coweb.cc.gatech.edu/mediaComp-plan
(5)  http://byrdmiddle.org/richard3/?page_id=2

References
Ackermann,      E.  (2004).   Piaget's   Constructivism,   Papert's      Constructionism:  What's    The Difference?,    from
           http://learning.media.mit.edu/ content/ publications/EA.Piaget_Papert.pdf
Antle, A, (2003). Case Study: The Design of CBC4Kids' StoryBuilder. In The Proc. of the 2003 Conference on
           Interaction Design for Children. 59-67, Preston, England.
Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the novel (M. Holquist & C. Emerson, Trans.). In M. Holquist (Ed.), The dialogic
           imagination (pp. 259-422). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky's poetics. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1986). The problem of speech genres (V. McGee, Trans.). In C. Emerson & M. Holquist (Eds.), Speech
           genres and other late essays (pp. 60-102). Austin: Univ. of Texas Press.
Benford S., & O'Malley, C., & Simsarian, K., & Stanton, D., & Sundblad, Y., & Taxen, G.,et al. (2000). Designing
           storytelling technologies to encouraging collaboration between young children. Proceedings of ACM CHI
           2000 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 556-563). The Hague, The Netherlands.
Bereiter, C. (1994). Implications of postmodernism for science, or, science as progressive discourse. Educational
           Psychologist, 29(1), 3-12.
Cassell,   J., &  Ryokai,    K.  (2001). Making   Space   for Voice:      Technologies to  Support   Children's  Fantasy   and
           Storytelling. Personal Ubiquitous Computing 5(3), 169-190.
Cohen,   E.    (1994). Designing   group    work: Strategies  for     the heterogeneous   classroom  (2nd  ed.). New   York:
           Teachers College Press.
Guzdial,   M.,  Ludovice,    P., Realff, M., Morley,   T., and Carroll,    K. (2002).  When    Collaboration Doesn't   Work.
           Proceedings    of the  International Conference    of     the  Learning  Sciences. (pp. 125-130).  Mahwah,      NJ:
           Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Harris,  J. (1994).    Plagiarism  in Computer    Science  Courses.       Proceedings  of the Conference  on    Ethics in  the
           Computer Science Age. (November 1994), 133-135.
Heap,   J. L.  (1985).  Discourse  in  the  production of  classroom      knowledge:  Reading  lessons.  Curriculum  Inquiry,
           15(3), 245-280.
Jenkins, Henry. Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robinson, A. J., and Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the Challenges of
           Participatory  Culture:  Media    Education  for   the    21st  Century. An    Occasional Paper   written   for the
           MacArthur Foundation.
Koschmann, T. (1999). Toward a dialogic theory of learning: Bakhtin's contribution to understanding learning in
           settings of collaboration. In Proceedings of the 1999 Conference on Computer Support For Collaborative

                                                              805                                                   CSCL 2007
         Learning (Palo Alto, California, December 12 - 15, 1999). C. M. Hoadley and J. Roschelle, Eds. Computer
         Support for Collaborative Learning. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Kozulin, A. (1996). A literary model for psychology. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse, Learning, and Schooling (pp.
         145-164). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lemke, J. (1990).   Talking science: Language, learning, and values.      Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Lenhart,  A.,  & Madden,   M.   (2005).  Teen  Content   Creators and     Consumers.   Washington,   DC:   Pew   Internet &
         American Life Project. Available at http://www.pewInternet.org/PPF/r/166/report_display.asp
Meadow, C.T. (1970) Man-Machine Communication. Wiley, New York. CR 12, 4(71)20, 918.
Pea, R.D. (1987) "Integrating human and computer intelligence." in Pea, R.D. and Sheingold, K. (eds.) Mirrors of
         mind: Patterns of Experience in Educational Computing. Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex: 128-146.
Pea, R. D. (1994). Seeing what we build together: Distributed multimedia learning environments for transformative
         communications. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3),       285-299.
Piaget, J. (1976). The grasp of consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rick, J., & Guzdial, M. (2006). Situating CoWeb: A scholarship of application. International Journal of Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(1), 89-115.
Roberts,  E.  (2002). Strategies for Promoting    Academic   Integrity    in CS Courses.   32nd  ASEE/IEEE     Frontiers  in
         Education (November 2002).
Roschelle,  J. (1996).  Learning  by collaborating:    Convergent conceptual    change.   In T. Koschmann     (Ed.), CSCL:
         Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 171-186). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Scardamalia,   M.  &  Bereiter,  C. (1994). Computer     support  for  knowledge-building     communities.  Journal  of  the
         learning sciences. 3(3), 265-283.
Sheard, J., Dick, M., Markham, S., Macdonald, I., & Walsh, M. (2002). Cheating and plagiarism: Perceptions and
         practices of first year IT students. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, Proceedings of the 7th annual conference on
         Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education (ITiCSE 2002), 34(3), 183-187.
Stahl, G.  (2003).  Meaning   and interpretation  in  collaboration. In   B. Wasson,   S. Ludvigsen   & U.    Hoppe  (Eds.),
         Designing for change in networked learning environments: Proceedings of the international conference on
         computer     support for   collaborative learning   (CSCL     '03)   (pp. 523-532).    Bergen, Norway:      Kluwer
         Publishers.
Stewart-Gardiner, C., Kay, D. G., Little, J. C., Chase, J. D., Fendrich, J., Williams, L. A., and Wolz, U. (2001).
         Collaboration  vs  plagiarism   in computer    science programming      courses.  In  Proceedings    of the Thirty-
         Second SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (Charlotte, North Carolina, United
         States). SIGCSE '01. ACM Press, New York, NY, 406-407.
Strickland, R. (1991). Notes on Projective Construction. Presentation to CHI 1991.
Strickland, R., & Wright, J. (1990). Backyard Transformation-An Interim Project Report. Research report at Apple
         Computer's Vivarium Research Program.         Cited with permission from authors.
Suthers,  D.  (2005).  Technology   affordances   for  intersubjective  learning:  A  thematic  agenda  for   CSCL.   In  T.
         Koschmann,     D. D.   Suthers, &  T. W.    Chan (Eds.), Proceedings      of Computer   Supported    Collaborative
         Learning 2005: The Next 10 Years! (pp. 662­671). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wegerif, Rupert (2005) Reason and creativity in classroom dialogues. Language and Education, 19, (3), 223-238.
Wegerif,   R.  (In Press)  Dialogic  or  Dialectic?  The  Significance    of  Ontological  Assumptions     in Research    on
         Educational Dialogue. British Education Research Journal.
Wertsch, J. & Toma, C. (1995). Discourse and learning in the classroom: A sociocultural approach. In L. Steffe & J.
         Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education (pp. 159--174). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Wells,  G.  (2006).  Dialogic   Inquiry:  Towards    a Sociocultural   Practice   and  Theory   of Education.    New  York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Zahn, C., Pea, R., Mills, M., Rosen, J., Hesse, F., & Finke, M. (2005). Advanced video technologies to support
         collaborative  learning  in  school   education  and   beyond.    In  D.  Suthers   &  T.  Koschmann     (Eds.)  In
         Proceedings of the International CSCL-05 Conference, Taipei, Taiwan. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.

Acknowledgments
We thank    the Digital Youth    research group   at UC   Berkeley's   School   of Information  for  their encouragement,
especially our advisor, Dr. Peter Lyman. We appreciate the dedicated support of our fellow research team, Rachel
Strickland,  Carrie Burgener,   and  Nick   Reid. We    also thank   Jill Wright,   Greg  Niemeyer,   and  the   MacArthur
Foundation for their time and resources, Thanks are also due to the reviewers for their comments and feedback.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, we thank the eight fifth grade students for their enthusiasm and participation
in this collaborative learning experience.

                                                            806                                                    CSCL 2007
