   Exploring the Potential of a Handheld Participatory Simulation and
Social Network Application for Revealing Decision-Making Processes
           for Information Seeking Amongst Middle School Students

 Susan A. Yoon, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, yoonsa@gse.upenn.edu

         Abstract:   In  this study    a participatory  simulation   called the  Discussion    Game    combined    with
         TeCFlow,     a temporal    social   networks   visualization  program    is  used to  identify   socially and
         cognitively-oriented    rules   for selecting  discussion   partners. Whereas,    the majority   of rules  for
         previous interactions are based on social or random factors, after studying social network graphs,
         students cite more cognitive or informational factors as reasons for who to talk to.

Theoretical Considerations and Research Focus
         Recent research on networked handheld applications has focused on how they can be used to influence the
development of core CSCL skills and processes such as inquiry, collaboration, communication, decision-making,
motivation, engagement,     assessment,     and   information   access (Clyde,   2004;  Colella,  2000;   Klopfer  et al., 2004;
Klopfer  et al., 2005;  Relan    et al., 2003;    Yoon, in  press;  Zurita  &  Nussbaum,    2004).   Research   on  a  subset of
handheld  applications    called participatory    simulations   (Klopfer et al., 2005)   that embed    students in  face-to-face
simulations of complex events have been particularly valuable in demonstrating how technological affordances can
be leveraged   to support   the  acquisition   of  complex   problem-solving     skills such   as multiple   perspective   taking
(Yoon,  in  press).  Social   network    analytic   tools  have  also  been   used   to promote    CSCL    processes    although
applications of this sort have been relatively fewer in education. Gloor (2006) found that by applying social network
analyses to  their   own   online   communication      patterns  in a  university  course,    students were  able   to  improve
communication     behavior    in  virtual   group   activities. The    exploratory   work   reported   in this  study   aims   at
understanding the educational potential for an intervention that uses a handheld participatory simulation and social
network application to reveal decision-making rules about who students want to talk to in order to share and gain
information about a new science topic. It follows from previous research results (Yoon, in press) that demonstrated,
amongst other things, that visual feedback of individual opinions on a topic, provided middle school students with
information about their relative position in the classroom network and who they wanted to discuss their opinions
with. The   specific goals  for  this  study  are: 1)  to investigate  what  participatory    simulations coupled   with   social
network  analyses    reveal   about   students'   decision-making    processes;   and   2) to  investigate   how   students   use
information gleaned from social network graphs to make peer selections.

         The handheld participatory simulation used in the study is called the Discussion Game (Yoon, in press). In
this game,  participants   are  asked    to  rate an  issue on  a   Likert-scale from   -5 (completely    unacceptable)    to +5
(completely acceptable) and provide a rationale for their rating. Participants are required to exchange their ratings
and  rationales  with   other participants   via   the infrared  meet  function   on  the  handheld    and  are asked   to  hold
discussions with each other about their positions. After discussions, participants are encouraged to reflect on what
they heard and change their positions. Interactions are archived on each handheld and collectively uploaded to a
social networks visualization software program called TeCFlow which computes the information and provides a
visual graph of the communication network created from the game.

Methodology
         Volunteers for the study were recruited from two urban middle schools in West Philadelphia. The program
was advertised as an intensive academic camp held over two weeks during the summer, with a curricular focus on
cell biology and genetic engineering. Nine females and six males participated. All students were African American,
eight students from one middle school and seven from the other and all scheduled to attend grade 8 in the fall of
2006. The study took place over 10 days in a two-week, 40 hours of instruction time frame in August 2006. Students
explored  a  number     of  teacher-selected      and  student-selected  multimedia     and   print  materials  that   presented
information on genetic engineering of animals and plants. Curricular concepts covered from the School District of
Philadelphia's   grade  8  core  curriculum   were    DNA,   chromosomes,      genes, sexual   and  asexual  reproduction,    and
mitotic and meiotic cell division. Throughout the program, students were asked to reflect on information learned
about the effects of current genetic engineering research on human and non-human species. Five Discussion Games
were  played  over   the  course    of the   intervention.  The  specific  question   addressed   in the  game     was: Genetic

                                                                807                                                    CSCL 2007
engineering research and applications are acceptable. The data reported here were obtained from the five social
network graphs generated from the games and responses from three questions taken from a social networks survey
administered during the latter half of the program (on the seventh day of the ten day program): 1) Who have you
spoken to most consistently over time and why?; 2) What are the rules by which you make choices about who you
want to talk to?; and 3) Look at the last graph. Who on the last graph would you like to talk to most in the next game
and why? Themes and categories were discussed and negotiated amongst the researcher and a graduate assistant and
98% interrater reliability was obtained from two independent raters.

Results
        Students identified five rules by which they made choices about who to talk to in the Discussion Game. In
some cases, students identified more than one rule. Table 1 shows the rule and frequency in student responses.

                  Table 1: Rules by which students made choices and frequency of responses.

                                                Rule                                     Frequency
                  Talked to friends or people I was familiar with                           7
                  Random, no rules, talked to anyone who was available                      6
                  Talked to people who had a different rating than mine                     4
                  Talked to people who had a similar rating to mine                         1
                  Talked to people who had the most information                             1

        As shown in Table 1, the predominant rule by which students made choices about who to talk to was based
on familiarity or friendship prior to studying the graph of interactions. As a cross check, responses from students
about who they talked to most consistently over time and why produced similar findings in that 9 out of the 15
students identified a friend or person from their school. It should be noted that this pattern of choice was anecdotally
observed to be fairly consistent over the first six days of the program prior to administering the survey and students
were continually instructed to make decisions about who to talk to based on selection criteria other than friendship.
Despite these instructions, only one student followed the rule of choosing people who had the most information.
This student wrote, "The rules I went by are people who had the most important facts because it keeps my mind
changing." Although the set of rationales produced to support student ratings is yet to be analyzed, anecdotally, this
student showed   the  greatest growth  in conceptual understanding      as well as   the most    balanced evidence-based
perspective by the end of the program.

        Student responses to the third survey question about who on the last graph they wanted to talk to most and
why, provided more encouraging results. After reading the graph (Figure 1), 12 out of the 15 students indicated that
they wanted to talk to Chris (who had a rating of 5) in the next round and 2 out of the 15 wanted to talk to Jamie
(who had a rating of -5). The remaining student Chris himself wanted to talk to Jamie. Figure 1 shows that by the
seventh day, most students were selecting ratings in the middle range. Thus, selecting students who had ratings
vastly different than their own  appears  to represent a shift in their    selection strategies. Reasons  given for their
selections fall into the four categories outlined in Table 2. Comparing rules and reasons provided in Table 1 and 2, it
appears that students  based   their selections on different  criteria. Whereas,     the majority  of rules for previous
interactions were based on social or random factors, after studying the social network graph, students cited what
could be understood as more cognitive or informational factors as reasons for who to talk to.

                  Table 2: Reasons given for who students wanted to talk to after reading the graph.
                                                Reason                                    Frequency
                   Want to understand why their ratings are different                         7
                   Want to convince the person                                                5
                   No reason given                                                            2
                   Want to be convinced by the person                                         1

Discussion
        The pattern of choosing friends, also known as homophily, is a particularly robust finding in studies of
social networks of adolescents and has been shown to produce detrimental effects, for example, with respect to

                                                          808                                                   CSCL 2007
harmful   substance   use (Ennet  et al., 2006),    emotional    and  behavior   disorders  (Farmer &   Hollowell,  1994),   and
academic    effort and  choice   (Frank   et  al., 2005).  Frank   (1999)   discusses two   fundamental    principles of  social
psychology that link interactions of actors in networks to their decisions or rationales for choice. The first principle
describes choices being made based on the need to think and behave like others around them. The second principle
describes   choices based   on  informational   or  knowledge      needs.  Others have  discussed   similar dual   categories of
decision-making processes that compare socially-oriented selection pressures to cognitively or conceptually-oriented
selection  pressures  such   as content   vs. non-content     bias   (Gil-White, 2004);  practical problem-solving    vs.  norm
adoption and identity membership (Castlefranchi, 2001); and memetic or copying mechanisms                      vs. non-memetic
mechanisms (Dennett, 1995). Stanovich (2004) states that such processes can be described in terms of reflective vs.
non-reflective  selection.  In  any case,  the  implications   for   educational  contexts  are clear  in that the latter of  the
dichotomies ought to be the primary focus for school and learning in order to challenge the potentially detrimental
effects  that  social mechanisms     can   have    on  students.   This    study aimed   at investigating   what   participatory
simulations coupled with social network analyses could reveal about students' decision-making processes and how
students use information from social network graphs to make decisions. It has been demonstrated that information
contained within social network graphs can be used by teachers to trigger more cognitively-oriented selection rules
or strategies. As previously noted, further analyses are yet to be completed with the content of student rationales and
discussions produced by the Discussion Game in which further support for the use of participatory simulations and
social network analyses in educational domains is expected.

References

Castelfranci,   C. (2001).   Towards  a   cognitive   memetics:      Socio-cognitive  mechanisms    for   memes    selection and
          spreading. Journal of Memetics - Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission, 5, 1-14.
Clyde, L. (2004). Computing in the palm of your hand. Teacher Librarian, 31(3), 42-44.
Colella,  V.  (2000). Participatory   simulations:    Building   collaborative   understanding   through   immersive  dynamic
          modeling. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(4), 471-500.
Dennett, D. (1995). Darwin's Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Ennett, S.T., Bauman, K.E., Hussong, A., Faris, R., Foshee, V.A., and Cai, L. (2006) The peer context of adolescent
          substance use: Findings from social network analysis. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 16(2), 159-186.
Farmer,   T.W.   &    Hollowell, J.H.   (1994).    Social  networks     in mainstream    classrooms:   Social  affiliations  and
          behavioral characteristics of students with EBD. Journal of Emotional & Behavioral Disorders, 2(3), 143-
          163.
Frank, K.A. (1999) Organization culture as a complex system: Balance and information in models of influence and
          selection. Organization Science, 10(3), 253-277.
Frank,   K.A.,  Muller,   C.  &  Schiller,   K.    (2005, August).    The  social  milieus  of  adolescent  society   and    their
          implications  for  academic   effort.    Paper  presented  at the Annual   Meeting    of the American    Sociological
          Association. Philadelphia, PA.
Gil-White,   F. J. (2004).   Common   misunderstandings       of   memes   (and  genes):   The  promise   and  the limits of  the
          genetic analogy to cultural transmission processes. In S. Hurley and N. Chapter (Eds.). Perspectives on
          Imitation: From Cognitive Neuroscience to Social Science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gloor,  P., Paasviaara,   M.,  Schoder,   D.  &    Willems,   P. (2006,   September).  Correlating    performance   with  social
          network structure through teaching social network analysis. Paper presented at the Proc. Pro-Ve 06, 7th
          IFIP Conference on Working Enterprises, Helsinki, Finland.
Klopfer, E., Yoon, S. & Rivas, L. (2004). Comparative analysis of Palm and wearable computers for Participatory
          Simulations. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 347-359.
Relan, A., Guiton, G., Parker, N. & Wilkerson, L. (2003, April). A hand-held requirement for clinical education:
          Effectiveness of a systemic educational intervention in altering perception and use of handhelds among
          medical   students.   Paper presented      at   the annual    meeting   of  the   American    Educational   Research
          Association, Chicago, IL.
Stanovich, K. (2004). The Robot's Rebellion. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Yoon,   A.  (in press).   An   evolutionary   approach    to  harnessing    complex   systems   thinking   in  the science   and
          technology classroom. To appear in the International Journal of Science Education.
Zurita,  G. &   Nussbaum,    M.  (2004).   Computer      supported   collaborative learning  using  wirelessly  interconnected
          handheld computers. Computers & Education, 42, 289-314.

                                                                 809                                                  CSCL 2007
