        Just a cog in the machine: participatory robotics as a tool for
          understanding collaborative learning and decision-making

Paulo Blikstein, William Rand, Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University, 2120 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL, 60208.
                                     Email: {paulo, wrand, uri}@northwestern.edu

         Abstract: We will demonstrate the integration of a software-based multi-agent modeling platform
         with a participatory simulation environment and a real-time control system for a physical robotic
         agent. Both real and virtual participants will be able to act collaboratively in a simulation that will
         control a physical agent. The backbone of this demonstration is a widely used, freely available,
         mature modeling platform (NetLogo). We posit that this technological platform can be of use for
         researchers interested in investigating collaborative learning and decision-making, as well as to
         design collaborative learning activities. We will present preliminary findings from pilot studies
         with the tool.

Introduction
         Agent-based modeling has been increasingly used by scientists to study a wide range of phenomena such as
the interactions of species  in  an  ecosystem,  the  collisions of molecules  in a   chemical reaction, and   the food-
gathering behavior  of   insects (Bonabeau,   1999;   Wilensky   &  Reisman,  2006).  Such  phenomena,    in which     the
elements  within the  system  (e.g., predators,  molecules,   or ants) have  multiple behaviors  and a   large   range of
interaction patterns, have been termed complex and are collectively studied in a relatively young interdisciplinary
field called complex systems (Holland, 1995). Typical of complex phenomena is that the cumulative (aggregate)
patterns or behaviors at the macro level are not premeditated or directly actuated by any of the lower-level, micro-
elements. For example, flocking birds do not intend to construct an arrow-shaped structure (Figure 1), or molecules
in a gas are not aware of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. Rather, each element (agent) follows its "local" rules,
and the overall pattern arises as epiphenomenal to these multiple local behaviors i.e., the overall pattern emerges. In
the late eighties and early-nineties, Wilensky & Resnick (1993, 1995) realized that agent-based modeling could have
a significant impact on learning. They adapted languages and techniques heretofore used only with supercomputers
and brought them to classrooms. Powerful ideas such as emergence, self-organization, and randomness were put in
the hands (and minds) of children. To study the behavior of a chemical reaction, the student would observe and
articulate only the behavior of individual molecules -- the chemical reaction emerges from the interactions of these
molecular agents. Once the modeler assigns agents their local, micro-rules, the system can be set them into motion
and modelers can watch the overall patterns that emerge.

                              Figure 1. An agent-based model of the flocking behavior of birds.

         Participatory  simulations  are similar to  multi-agent simulation  except that students  play  the role  of  the
virtual agents,  sometimes  in   combination    with the virtual  agents (Wilensky    &  Stroup, 2002a).  In   a  typical
participatory simulation, a server runs a computer model, and students connect to the server through a networked
computer or calculator. The behavior of the whole system is not defined ahead of time but instead emerges from the
participation of various   individuals   in the simulation.  This   emergent  behavior  can then  be displayed     to  the
participants  through  a central server  with   the results usually projected at  the front of the room.  Each     of  the
participants will be assigned one agent on the screen, and would control its behavior. For example, in the traffic
"Gridlock" (Wilensky & Stroup, 2002b) participatory simulation activity (PSA, Figure 2), each student controls a

                                                            81                                                 CSCL 2007
traffic light in a busy city. In the "Disease Spread" PSA (Wilensky & Stroup, 2002b), each student will be assigned
different roles (doctors or patients).
         We have also recently started to incorporate physical devices in agent-based models, using sensors and
probes to gather data about   the real-world    phenomena     under  scrutiny.                      The presence         of physical        sensors       enables
students to ground their models in empirical data and further refine the models. This approach, bifocal modeling,
permits a deeper understanding of the physical world than pure virtual modeling (Blikstein & Wilensky, 2006).                                                This
is particularly true within educational robotics, where research has shown that designing and controlling devices in
the physical  world introduces    new   challenges  such    as understanding                         error, noise,       mechanical         advantage,        and
mechanical failure, which cannot be explored in purely virtual environments (Martin, 1996).

          Figure 2. A classroom ready for a participatory simulation (left), and students during the activity (right)

Rationale and technological design
         The three aforementioned areas (agent-based modeling, participatory simulations, and bifocal modeling)
are concerned with the creation, manipulation, and development of agents in one form or another. Thus combining
these three systems in to one unified platform would be useful, since it would facilitate a synthesis of their main
affordances: understanding of the role of locality and emergence (agent-based modeling), mapping human action to
emergent, collective behaviors (participatory simulation), and controlling physical objects in noisy environments.
We  will  demonstrate a  novel  technological     based   on  the NetLogo/HubNet                            (Wilensky,       1999)          architecture      that
supports  simulated agents,   participatory  agents     and   physical  agents.                       We    have       developed          a methodological
framework to help us understand this system, the "Human, Embedded, Virtual agents via Mediation (HEV-M)"
framework (Rand, Blikstein, & Wilensky, 2006). Within this framework and the accompanying platform, designers
can create participatory simulations in which each participant controls one element within a physical system (a car, a
mini-factory, a robotic arm   with multiple     joints, etc). In the conference,                       we   will       show one         instantiation      of the
platform (see Figure 3). It consists of a robot-car with four motors. Each motor is connected to a serial interface
board (the GoGo Board), which communicates to the server. Each of the four users is assigned a motor to control,
and turning the car is achieved by reversing the correct pair of wheels on each side of the car.

                                                                                        Participant       Participant       Participant      Participant

                                                                                                             Server and
                                                                                                              Projector

                                                                                     Robot

                                                                                                                               Obstacle

                                                                                                               Screen

          Figure 3. The system's components (left), and the schematic setup of the demonstration (right)

Preliminary User Studies
         We have run three preliminary studies, two of them at professional conferences for computer scientists, and
one at a  research university with     doctoral students  and  faculty. The                   setup     was   identical      in         every situation.      The
apparatus was setup on the floor (see Figure 3), and there were four notebook computers placed in front of the robot
car. Each of the four participants could turn the motor on and off, reverse direction, and change the motor power
level. They were given the simple task of moving the robot forward while avoiding an obstacle along the way. As

                                                              82                                                                                         CSCL 2007
these were    proof-of-concept  studies, our evidence  is based  on   observations   of the activity.  At   this stage of the
development of our platform, the studies were exploratory, both to provide initial insight into participants' reactions
and to improve our design. Nonetheless, the results were intriguing. Before the start of the activity, participants were
very confident that they could accomplish the task with ease. However, as soon as the first turn of the robot was
necessary, participants would start talking back and forth, asking who had control over which wheel, and which state
(forward,  backward,  high  power,   low   power)  each   wheel  was   in. At  this  point, participants    started to report
increasing frustration with their ability to solve the problem, and started complaining that the other participants were
not helping them. In two of the groups, we observed some emergent strategies for optimizing the process, such as
delegating leadership to one participant, or the formation of two groups each with two participants, which would
then act fairly independently. In the end, the three groups were able to reach their goal, but often it took much longer
than  they expected,  and  several   of  them got  stuck  for long  periods  of  time   right around    the obstacle.  These
preliminary   runs of the  platform  seem  to indicate   that there were   two   levels of  learning  taking  place.   At the
individual level, participants were trying to learn how to better control their own wheel. At the group level we saw
evidence   of strategy-generation, especially  as  participants appeared   to  learn  that  individual  actions   and  groups
actions are fundamentally different. For example, at the onset of the activity, they were unaware that an error from
any of the participants would ruin the group's goal, no matter how well the other participants were doing. From our
observations and interviews, it was noticeable that the "hands-on" experience in the participatory task challenged the
initial strategies, and many participants claimed that they would use a different strategy if attempting the task again.

Conclusion
         We have built a technological platform for investigating collaborative learning and decision making. Our
platform  seamlessly  integrates  three  technologies: agent-based    modeling,  educational   robotics,  and    participatory
simulations.  We   believe that this tool has significant   potential for  three main   reasons (1)  it enables   logging  of
participant's actions, as to identify patterns and match them to observations, (2) it offers researchers in the field of
computer-supported collaborative learning an easy to-use tool to design engaging collaborative learning activities
and, (3) it foregrounds the role of individual actions within the accomplishment of a collective goal, highlighting the
connections between simple individual actions and the resultant macroscopic behaviors of the system.

References
Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2006). The Missing Link: A Case Study of Sensing-and-Modeling Toolkits for
         Constructionist Scientific Investigation. In Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Conference on
         Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 2006), Kerkrade, The Netherlands, 980-982.
Bonabeau, E., Dorigo, M., Théraulaz, G. (1999). Swarm intelligence: From natural to artificial systems. London:
         Oxford University Press.
Holland, J. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Reading, MA: Helix Books/ Addison­Wesley.
Martin, F. (1996). Ideal and Real Systems: A study of notions of control in undergraduates who design robots. In Y.
         Kafai & M. Resnick (Eds.), Constructionism in Practice (pp. 297-332). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
         Associates Inc.
Rand, W., Blikstein, P., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Widgets, Planets, and Demons: the Case for the Integration of
         Human, Embedded, and Virtual Agents via Mediation. Paper presented at the Swarmfest 2006.
Resnick, M., & Wilensky, U. (1993). Beyond the Deterministic, Centralized Mindsets: A New Thinking for New
         Science. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association conference, Atlanta, GA.
Wilensky,  U.  (1999). NetLogo.    Evanston,   IL: Center   for Connected    Learning   and   Computer-Based        Modeling.
         http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo.
Wilensky,  U.,  &   Reisman,   K.  (2006).   Thinking  like a  wolf,  a  sheep   or a firefly: Learning     biology   through
         constructing  and   testing  computational    theories --    an  embodied    modeling   approach.    Cognition    &
         Instruction, 24(2), 171-209.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1995). New Thinking for New Sciences: Constructionist Approaches for Exploring
         Complexity. Presented at the American Educational Research Association conference, San Francisco, CA.
Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W. (2002). Participatory Simulations: Envisioning the networked classroom as a way to
         support systems learning for all. Paper presented at the Presented at the Annual meeting of the American
         Research Education Association, New Orleans, LA, April 2002.
Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W. (2002). NetLogo HubNet Gridlock and Disease models.
         http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/models/HubNetGridlock and /HubNetDisease. Center for Connected
         Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.

                                                            83                                                      CSCL 2007
