                                         The disembodied act:
    Copresence and indexical symmetry in computer-mediated
                                           communication

                                  Alan Zemel, Wes Shumar, Murat Perit Cakir
                          Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut St. Philadelphia, PA 19104
                          arz26@drexel.edu, shumarw@drexel.edu, mpc48@drexel.edu

         Abstract: CSCL has recently begun to consider how shared understanding is achieved in
         computer-mediated      interactional environments.      In  this  paper,  we  explore   how   actors
         produce and maintain indexical symmetry and reciprocity of perspectives in online chat
         by establishing reciprocal fields of copresence. We use ethnomethodologically informed
         analysis   to describe   the    interactional methods      by  which   actors  establish   indexical
         symmetry and reciprocal fields of copresence.

Introduction
         Web-based     technologies   support   fundamental      features of social  interaction. Suitable   platforms
now exist that exploit the production of reciprocal perspectives through the performance of disembodied
actions. These technologies offer different affordances for the display of actions, the practices of reference
and representation, and the achievement and maintenance of presence, copresence and indexical symmetry
which account for the significant differences between interactions based on disembodied action and those
based on embodied action.

         Social  interaction  arises when   actors  act   in coordinated   ways   through  mutual    engagement   with
respect to   recognizable   and   meaningful    activities   and  shared-in-common      and  mutually    recognizable
orientations to  1) each   other, 2) their actions   and  3)  features  of the  scene  in which   these  activities are
occurring. Social interaction requires more than reciprocal contact, it requires a reciprocity of perspectives.
According    to Hanks   (2000,  p.   7), reciprocity   of perspective   is "neither   similarity  ("sharedness"),   nor
congruence per se, but the idea that interactants' perspectives are opposite, complimentary parts of a single
whole, with each oriented to the other." This reciprocity of perspectives establishes a sense of copresence
in which  the   experiences  and  perceptions   of the    actors in  a scene become    practically   available to each
other. In this research, we demonstrate how shared understanding and group cognition (Stahl, 2006) are
achieved through the coordinated exchange of postings, the display of whiteboard objects and the indexical
symmetries these exchanges and postings both display and achieve.

Analysis
         We   examined    recorded   logs  from student      interactions using the   VMT   Chat    System.  The  data
consist of time-stamped chat logs and whiteboard displays of math problem solving sessions among middle
school students. The chats were sponsored and conducted by the Math Forum of Drexel University as part
of its participation in the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) research project, an NSF funded project..

         One    of the features   of systems  that  use   chat   and virtual whiteboards    is  that actors  are  never
actually present to others in an embodied sense. Their presence is established and inferred from actions
originating  from   their "node"  that   change the    system  in ways    that are   observable  to  others. However,
presence  is not   sufficient to  achieve   social interaction.     Copresence    is a condition    of and   for social
interaction. According to Zhao, "Copresence as mode of being with others is a form of human colocation in
which individuals become "accessible, available, and subject to one another" (Goffman, 1963, p. 22). More
specifically, it is a set of spatio-temporal conditions in which instant two-way interactions can take place.
Instant human    interaction  refers  to real-time  or  near  real-time   human    communication,      which  excludes
diachronic exchanges like postal correspondence, and two-way human interaction refers to reciprocal or
feedback-based human communication.... Copresence in this sense is thus a form of human colocation in
space-time that allows for instantaneous and reciprocal human contact" (Zhao, 2003, p. 446).

                                                          810                                                     CSCL 2007
         Chat  properly   consists  of   a series  of labeled,   time-stamped     text  postings that    are treated as
accountably authored actions. These actions are 1) prospectively implicative with respect to the appearance
of possible next authored postings and 2) retrospectively implicative with respect to the intelligibility of
prior postings. The reciprocal nature of these postings demonstrates participant's perspectives in ways that
allow for mutual orientation. There is, built into them, the assumption that a reader will be able to occupy
to some degree the perspective of the author of the posted text.

         As an example, the text posting, "hi." is readable as an authored social action, a greeting that calls
on others to respond. It is a textual artifact the sense of which is determined by the recipients' work of
reading (Livingston, 1995). In online chats, the actors' work of posting and reading text messages is how
they organize, constitute and participate in chats(1). Readers are capable of assuming the perspective that
this posting  represents  and thus  know    how   to  read it as a  greeting.  It is the recognizable    design of   the
postings achieved through the work of reading in the chat environment that allows recipients to regard this
posting  as a social action.  That  the  recipients   recognize  this posting  as    a social action  is evidenced   by
subsequent    postings that   serve   as   in-kind  responses,   thus    displaying    that the  initial posting   was
recognizable and treated as a greeting.

         Each posting is assigned "authorship" by the system based on login information provided to the
system. System-documented authorship is part of the way that the system itself facilitates and organizes the
presentation  of postings  as  the  copresence     of the  author  and   recipients.   Furthermore,   each   posting is
displayed sequentially in a stream of postings with an appropriate time stamp. The appearance of sequential
postings allows   for  recipients  to  treat  the  appearance    of   postings as    an  orderly affair,  making     the
"readability" of a posting   unproblematic(2).     Each   posting  is available   as   both authored, sequenced    and
addressed, thus serving as a method of displaying a mutual orientation to other actors, since postings are
texts that others are expected to read and to which one, some or any may respond.

         The intelligibility of chat postings occasionally requires that readers refer to and inspect the virtual
whiteboard.   Consider the  following    chat postings,   "How   long  is that line?"   followed by   "Line   AB."   No
other markers or referential indicators are used. The intelligibility of these posts relies on the presumption
that there  actually  are inspectable    referents   for  recipients  to  inspect  and   makes   relevant    recipients'
inspection of the virtual whiteboard for the referent to which these indexical expressions refer.

         The   achievement    and   management        of indexical   symmetry     includes    matters conventionally
considered conceptual or cognitive in nature. Various conceptual objects are represented in the chat and on
the virtual whiteboard as relevant matters about which inquiry can be made, for which there are shared-in-
common practices by which reference can be made and about which mutually relevant responses can be
produced. Consider the following postings:
         "Im (8:35:12 PM EDT): How long is that line?"
         "Im (8:35:21 PM EDT): Line AB".
         "F   (8:35:25 PM EDT): 10"
This invokes an organization of conceptual features, such as the various properties (length, "How long...")
of recognizable and identifiable geometric objects ("that line," "Line AB"). The response to the query is
"10". This is produced without embellishment or elaboration, affirming that the referenced feature (length)
of the conceptual object (the line) is both intelligible and practically describable, and that such a description
can properly consist of a numerical representation. Thus the response, "10," is presented as and is seen to
be a candidate value for the line's length.

         The production and maintenance of indexical symmetry in VMT chat with respect to conceptual
objects and their features thus involves:
        displaying authored text postings for other participants to read,
        displaying conceptual objects using textual references, graphical displays, deictic references, etc.,
         for others to inspect
        providing participants with ways of locating and identifying displayed conceptual objects, and
        using these text postings and object displays according to recognized and proper practices of use
         that demonstrate that actors are copresent and share a mutual and symmetric orientation to each
         other and the referential objects and resources of their interaction.

                                                          811                                                      CSCL 2007
Discussion
          Indexical    symmetry    is the  ground    upon     which  shared   understandings     are  established   and
maintained.   In   face-to-face interaction,   indexical  symmetry    is achieved,    demonstrated    and   maintained
through   the  embodied    actions    of  indexical  reference.   These  actions,   which    are the  observable    and
reportable organization of actors' participation in their interaction, constitute their shared understanding.
Shared   understanding    thus  is an interactional  matter.  In  chat, the procedures    by   which  users  "use"  the
system, and the ways that the chat system responds to that use, is treated by users as interaction. This kind
of  interaction  is distinguished   from  other   forms  of interaction  by virtue    of the  fact  that actors are not
actually  present   to  each other,   at least not   in any   embodied   sense.   The    disembodied     nature of  chat
interaction presents challenges and opportunities to users (Garcia and Jacobs 1999).

          Part  of  the practical  achievement    of interaction  therefore involves   establishing   and  maintaining
presence, copresence and mutually sustainable recognition of features of their interactional space. In other
words, actors must be recognizable as actors in the scene. They must be recognized as actors in the ways
they participate, in ways that are intelligible to themselves, other actors in the scene, in ways that display
that they are participants. While Hanks (1992, 1996, 2000), Goodwin (2000, 2003), Hindmarsh and Heath
(2000) and    others  have explored    these issues  in  face-to-face   interactions, we  propose     to examine   these
issues in an   online   environment   in which  actors   interact by posting   text messages     to a chat system   and
posting objects and text documents to a linked virtual whiteboard.

Endnotes
(1) According to Livingston (1995), "The work of reading is the work of finding the organization of that
    work  that    a text describes.   The contextual    clues in a text offer the   grounds,   from   within the active
    participatory work of reading, for finding how those clues provide an adequate account of how the text
    should be read." (p. 14).
(2) Readability is different from intelligibility. While chat postings may have identical time stamps, there
    is no possibility of "overlap" in any conventional face-to-face conversational sense since the system
    automatically assures the sequential display of all postings.

References
Garcia, A., & Jacobs, J. B. (1999). The Eyes of the Beholder: Understanding the Turn-Taking System in
          Quasi-Synchronous        Computer-Mediated      Communication.      Research    on   language     and  social
          interaction, 32(4), 337-367.
Goffman, E. (1963). Behavior in public places. New York: The Free Press.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32,
          1489-1522.
Goodwin, C. (2003). Embedded context. Research on language and social interaction, 34(4), 323-350.
Hanks,   W. F.    (1992). The   indexical  ground    of deictic  reference. In A.   Duranti    & C.   Goodwin    (Eds.),
       Rethinking context: Language as an interactive phenomenon (pp. 43-76). Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.
Hanks, W. F. (1996). Language and communicative practices. Boulder: Westview.
Hanks,   W.   F.  (2000). Intertexts:    Writings on    language,  utterance,  and    context. Lanham:     Rowman    &
          Littlefield.
Hindmarsh,    J.,  &  Heath, C.    (2000). Embodied     reference:  A   study  of deixis   in  workplace    interaction.
          Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 1855-1878.

Livingston, E. (1995). An anthropology of reading. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Stahl, G. (2006b). Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge. Cambridge:
          The MIT Press.
Zhao,  S. (2003).   Toward   a  taxonomy    of  copresence.   Presence;  teleoperators    and    virtual environments,
          12(5), 445-455.

                                                          812                                                      CSCL 2007
