                          Information as a Social Achievement:
                      Collaborative Information Behavior in CSCL

                                         Nan Zhou, Alan Zemel, Gerry Stahl
                            Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut St. Philadelphia, PA 19104
                      nan.zhou@ischool.drexel.edu, arz26@drexel.edu, gerry.stahl@drexel.edu

        Abstract:  In    computer-supported    collaborative   learning  (CSCL)    environments,     learners  in
        problem   solving contexts   constantly engage    in information   seeking,  information    sharing, and
        information use. However, these activities have not been well investigated in CSCL research. We
        have studied information behavior of small groups of middle school students engaged in online
        math  problem    solving. More    specifically,   we examined    how   participants negotiate    and  co-
        construct their  information  needs,   how  they   seek  information,  and   how   they make   sense   of
        discovered  information.  We     argue that   for learners in  a CSCL    environment,    information   is
        essentially a social achievement that emerges through the interactions of the group. Information
        only becomes information for participants when it is interactionally constructed to be meaningful
        and intelligible in their local situation. Analyzing learners' information behavior from such an
        interactional perspective    can help  us  understand    their practices of  doing   collaboration   and
        learning. This   has significant implications   for  designing  CSCL   environments     and  information
        resources to support small groups' information behavior and collaborative learning.

        Keywords: CSCL, information behavior, conversation analysis, meaning making

Introduction
        In his keynote talk at CSCL 2002, Koschmann (2002) defined the central concern of the CSCL field as
"meaning and practices of meaning making in the context of joint activity and the ways in which these practices are
mediated through  designed   artifacts". People often   interact with  information   resources  to learn. We   experience
intentional learning in schools, libraries, and other contexts. We also are engaged in a constant process of informal
learning in our everyday life in order to make sense of what is around us, to solve a task or a problem, to make
decisions, and so forth. Information seeking, processing, creating, and using are central activities in such a sense-
making  process in order  to  bridge  the  gap  of  understanding.   In  this paper, we  argue   that these   activities of
information practices are essential  components    of the  practices of  meaning  making    and learning  for  learners  in
collaborative environments, and thus need closer examination and understanding.

        Information behavior, "the totality of human behavior in relation to sources and channels of information,
including both active and passive information seeking, and information use" (Wilson, 2000, p. 49), has been one of
the central topics of information science. A large quantity of research has been done but most of them tend to focus
on individuals. Information behavior has been of interest to CSCL researchers even though information practices in
the context of collaboration are still relatively less studied thus not well understood. In the study presented in this
paper, we have observed interactions of small groups of middle school students engaged in solving a mathematical
problem  collaboratively in  virtual environments.    We   have  examined  how   students   identify  and construct  their
information needs collaboratively, how they go about finding the information, and how informational artifacts are
produced and recognized as meaningful and useful information for them.

        This study is situated in a larger research agenda of the Virtual Math Teams (VMT) research project where
researchers investigate  the  innovative   use  of  online   collaborative environments     to  support   effective K-12
mathematics learning. At VMT, students are invited to participate in about one-hour-long chat sessions in online
environments where they discuss and solve a math problem in small groups. The chat is recorded for analysis. We
have applied an ethnomethodologically-informed approach that combines aspects of conversation analysis (Sacks,
1992) and   ethnomethodology   (Garfinkel,  1967)  to analyze    information  practices of  participants  in small groups
(Stahl, 2006b). We argue that information is a social achievement, that is, information is not given, but is a kind of
status accorded various situated, locally designed and produced artifacts. This status is not a feature of the artifact
but is produced as an interactional social achievement. Seeing information from such an interactional perspective
can help us understand participants' practices of doing collaboration and learning.

                                                           813                                                   CSCL 2007
Data Analysis
        In this section, we show the analysis of one excerpt of interactional data on how participants construct
information needs and how an informational artifact is produced as meaningful information for them. The following
7 minute long except (Table 1) is from a VMT chat session during which three participants (REA, PIN, MCP) are
working on a geometry problem as presented in figure 1 through an AOL chat program. A moderator is there to get
them started by first greeting them, presenting the problem, and explaining that the task for them is to share their
ideas and collaborate on solving the problem. They are also asked to make sure everyone understands if they think
the problem gets solved. It is about half way through a one hour and twenty minute session. Before the conversation
gets to this point, REA and PIN have already engaged in active discussion. One of them created a picture as shown
in Figure 2 and sent it to the moderator. It was made available to the group through a website, which they have been
referring to in this excerpt of their interaction.

  Table 1: An excerpt from a VMT chat session
 Line#   Handle   Posting                                      Time      Delay      Finding CE - posted February 16,
 120     REA      Are u there PIN                              8:48:08   0:00:17    2004
 121     PIN      ya im here                                   8:48:29   0:00:21    Given the following situation:
 122     REA      checking                                     8:48:37   0:00:08    - Side AB of triangle ABC has a length of
 123     REA      u stuck cause i am:-(                        8:49:07   0:00:30    8 inches.
 124     PIN      well angle CED is congruent to angle B       8:49:56   0:00:49    - Line DEF is drawn parallel to AB so
 125     PIN      if that helps                                8:50:06   0:00:10    that D is on segment AC and E is onsegment BC.
 126     REA      It helps                                     8:50:48   0:00:42    - Line AE extended bisects angle FEC.
 127     REA      but i already estlabished that               8:51:15   0:00:27    - DE has a length of 5 inches.
 128     PIN      im stuck                                     8:51:36   0:00:21    What's the length of CE?
 129     MCP      What's known?                                8:51:42   0:00:06
 130     MCP      BE:EC = 3:5, right?                          8:52:05   0:00:23
 131     REA      how did you get that                         8:52:42   0:00:37         Figure 1. Problem: Finding CE
 132     PIN      how did u get that                           8:52:43   0:00:01
 133     PIN      lol                                          8:52:46   0:00:03
 134     MCP      Tri ABC similar to DEC                       8:53:10   0:00:24
 135     PIN      ya we got that                               8:53:19   0:00:09
 136     MCP      AB:DE = 8:5, right?                          8:53:30   0:00:11
 137     REA      We know that                                 8:53:33   0:00:03
 138     PIN      ya                                           8:53:35   0:00:02
 139     MCP      So BC:EC=8:5                                 8:53:51   0:00:16
 140     REA      ya                                           8:54:11   0:00:20
 141     MCP      That 8 breaks down 3 for BE, 5 for EC        8:54:23   0:00:12
 142     REA      We might have to use law of sines            8:54:38   0:00:15
 143     PIN       havent learned that yet                     8:54:50   0:00:12
 144     PIN       whats it say                                8:55:04   0:00:14
 145     MCP       Sine A / a = Sine B / b = Sine C / c        8:55:15   0:00:11                 Figure 2. The drawing

        REA's posting at line 123 is read as a question directed to PIN asking about PIN's status on solving the
problem: "(are) you stuck (?)". It also establishes REA's own position as "being stuck". This inquiry is taken up by
PIN as a request for information that could possibly help him getting "unstuck". PIN responds with providing some
information that he possibly has discovered from the problem description ("angle CED is congruent to angle B").
This offering of information is followed by "if that helps", calling for work of assessment of its usefulness in terms
of solving the problem, which is ratified by REA, followed by the statement that the information is not new ("but I
already established that"). At this point, a request for information is made; an attempt of providing the information
is assessed as "useful" but not new; therefore the earlier request is still open but revised as a request for something
new. PIN  articulates he   cannot  be  of  any   help   to take up  the request, which   opens    up an opportunity       for other
participants to bring in new, potentially "useful" information.

        Right at this moment, MCP joins this line of conversation by asking a question "What's known?". One of
the features of this query is that it is calling for recipients to consider a set of resources that can be shared. It serves
to preface what will follow as information action, organizing action in relation to others and to available resources in
ways that provide for subsequent postings to be seen as informative. MCP takes over the call himself by proposing a
math proportional equation. This proposition is phrased as a question to solicit assessment from the group. This

                                                                814                                                       CSCL 2007
proposal is responded to by each of the two participants by directing an inquiry for further information, that is, a
request for MCP to produce some elaboration or account for what he just provided as "known" fact. We see that
three co-present    participants displayed   different   levels of  understanding    on  what     is known   at  this  point. This
discrepancy    needs to  be resolved    to bring  the   group into  sync in   order  for them   to   proceed  with  collaborative
problem solving, that is, to build a common ground for their subsequent interactions. In this excerpt, MCP is called
upon to elaborate on his offering and share what he knows with the rest of the group. This is what we will see
shortly in the   following  interactional    moves.   We   will also   see  that  "information    sharing"   here   is not simply
transferring a piece of information as a bounded object. Rather, participants do the work of building understanding
of the  information  in  their situated    locus. It is the  work   they do   that  makes    a potentially   informative   artifact
meaningful and intelligible for them.

          MCP takes up this request and starts to present to the group how that "known" fact is derived by what is
given  in  the problem   step  by  step. This   expository   work   of  MCP   as  an effort  of   producing   an  account   of the
information is led in an organized way of presenting base facts and what is being derived from them. Each step is
aligned with agreement or acknowledgement from the other two participants. In line 141, by concluding "That 8
breaks down 3 for BE, 5 for EC", MCP completes the process of presenting a proof. MCP's last posting as part of
the offered explanation doesn't get a response. The fact that this thread of expository work stops here marks the
conclusion of the work of producing an account of the "known" fact "BE:EC = 3:5" and making meaning of this
account   by  other  participants. This    also signals  the  transition between     threads   of  conversation   and   opens  the
interactional space up possibly for a new incoming proposal. 15 seconds after the preceding posting, which is a
noticeable gap in a live chat, REA makes a proposal that suggests the possibility of using "law of sines" as a strategy
to proceed   on tackling  the  problem.    By   stating he hasn't   learned  that yet, PIN   positions   himself   as  an  inquirer
seeking information. This information inquiry is responded to by MCP who provides the equations of law of sines.

Discussion
          When students are working on a math problem together, they often need to find information that they think
is useful for solving the problem. Usually the process starts with identifying what is known and what is needed. As
demonstrated in the preceding analysis, information needs are negotiated and constructed by the group. When an
information    need  is specified  and   posed,   there  are  different ways    the subsequent       interaction unfolds.  In  this
particular case, proposals    on what    information    might be  useful are  provided.   A    proposal   is either evaluated   by
participants on its usefulness or initiates a request for more information to elaborate on it. The latter constitutes the
process of participants making meaning of the information being provided. The information provider is called upon
on  producing   an   account  of   it, which  is  achieved    interactionally with   calling   for   and getting   assessment   or
acknowledgement.     Only   through     such interactional   work   is  the information   artifact   made    meaningful    for the
participants in the local context, thus becoming real information for them. Information is not a predefined object
with fixed boundaries but emerges as a product of the social interaction. In this exemplary case, we showed our
analysis on how "BE:EC=3:5" as an information artifact is produced as meaningful information for the participants.
Most   online  information   resources   are organized    in  a way    that information   is   treated as an  object   with   fixed
boundaries. It is questionable how such resources can help learners find what they need and support their learning
experiences and collaboration. Analyzing group's information behavior and seeing information from an interactional
and social   perspective  can  help    information   resource   design, for  example,    how   resources  can    be organized   to
provide multiple access points to learners at different levels and how social aspects can be brought into the design of
digital libraries. We have noticed that most participants treat the group as a primary resource for seeking information
although   some  of  them   also  actively   use  online  resources    such  as  Google,  the   Math   Forum     digital  libraries,
wikipedia, etc. How to integrate various resources in to CSCL environments to support learners' needs is another
question being put on the research agenda for the community.

References
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Koschmann, T. (2002). Dewey's contribution to the foundations of CSCL research. In Proceedings of CSCL 2002
        (pp. 17-22). Boulder, CO: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Stahl, G. (2006b). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT
        Press.
Wilson, T.D. (2000). Human information behavior. Information science, Vol 3, No. 2.

                                                                815                                                      CSCL 2007
