                        Why Technology Isn't Making a Difference:
           Coming to Terms with Ubiquitous Learning in High School
                                                    Classrooms

      Erica C. Boling, Graduate School of Education, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, 08901
                                              Email: ecboling@rci.rutgers.edu

         Abstract:   This    qualitative  study  investigated  teachers' and   students'  participation  in  a  1-to-1
         laptop  initiative.   The  study  explored how    high   school teachers'  beliefs about    technology  and
         education impacted classroom instruction. Findings revealed how teachers' conceptions of English
         education   and    their  predominantly    logocentric    view  of language      reinforced individualized
         instruction  and   a  transmissive   model   of education.  Findings   alert educators  to  the  views  and
         beliefs of technology integration that can undermine collaborative and transformational uses of
         technology.

           The advent of the Internet and various forms of information and communication technologies (ICT) have
created an information-age which is redefining what it means to be literate in today's society. From cell phones,
email messages and digital libraries to online banking, technology is playing an increasingly significant role in our
lives (Leu et al., 2004). As technology presents new possibilities for communicating and accessing information, the
literacy practices in which people make meaning, communicate, and express themselves are continually evolving
(Leu et al., 2004). Now, perhaps more than ever before in the history of adolescent literacy education, the "demands
of new technologies and the complexities of living in a highly globalized society" are seriously taxing educators'
capacities as  a profession    to  respond   to  adolescents' needs   in  ways  that  "will enable   them    to become     fully
functioning citizens of the 21st century" (Alvermann, 2000, para. 4). In response to today's Digital Society and a
need to prepare students for the literacies that are becoming central for accessing, acquiring, and critically analyzing
information,  local,  state,   and  federal  initiatives have  been  created    to assist teachers   to effectively    integrate
technology to support student learning (NCATE, 2006). In an effort to support preservice and practicing teachers in
meeting these initiatives, teacher educators are faced with new challenges to "prepare graduates who are capable and
committed to using technology as a learning tool" (Howland & Wedman, 2004, p. 240). These challenges, however,
are occurring at a time when far too little research exists on these literacies and the ways in which both teachers and
students acquire  the   skills that are  essential to succeed   in today's  information-rich   world    (Leu et al., 2004).  A
number of researchers have found that technology is frequently underused, poorly integrated into classrooms, and
seldom   impacts or  alters  teachers'   regular teaching  practice (Cuban,    2001;  Hennessey   et al., 2005).  In   addition,
Goodson and Mangan (1995) have argued that relatively few teachers are integrating new technologies into subject
teaching in a way that "motivates pupils and enriches learning or stimulates higher-level thinking and reasoning" (p.
14). The purpose of this study was to investigate how technology was used in ninth and tenth grade classrooms
where all teachers and students had access to their own wireless, laptop computers. The research questions guiding
the  study were  a)  How    do    high school English    teachers, during their  second   year of  the  laptop  initiative, use
technology to support teaching and learning? and b) How do teachers' beliefs about the role of technology provide
insight into the ways in which technology was being used?

Related Literature
         A  number   of  researchers    have  described  how  technology    is often  underused  and   poorly   integrated  into
classroom practice (Cuban, 2001; Goodson & Mangan, 1995; Hennessy et al., 2005). Some researchers have argued
that encouraging  changes      in teachers' instructional practices  and  their beliefs  toward  technology    integration  can
present more of an obstacle to technology integration than having limited resources (Rogers, 2002). Studies have
revealed that the process of changing teachers' pedagogical thinking can be quite slow, and there is still much to
learn about how to support teachers in making these changes (Borko & Putnam, 1996; Kerr, 1991). Lagrange et al.
(2001) have argued that the predominant focus of most current research has focused on the difficulties that students
confront when learning with ICT and not on teacher learning. In an effort to further explore teacher learning and
beliefs in relation  to technology     and  education,   the researcher  designed   the  current study   with   the belief  that
knowledge   is  socially constructed.     She also  designed   the  study   believing  that literacy  learning   is  ultimately
multimodal in nature. A multimodal approach to learning requires educators "to take seriously and attend to the

                                                               84                                                    CSCL 2007
whole range of modes involved in representation and communication" (Jewitt & Kress, 2003, p. 1). When viewing
technology integration from a multimodal perspective, the meanings of words and images, "read or heard, seen static
or changing, are different because of the contexts in which they appear -- contexts that consist significantly of the
other media components" (Lemke, 1998, para. 2). A multimodal view recognizes how "written-linguistic modes of
meaning  are part and  parcel  of visual, audio, and   spatial  patterns of  meaning"    (Cope &    Kalantzis, 2000,   p. 5).
According to Lemke (1998), current theories and teaching of literacy "have been long been too logocentric," where
language alone is seen "as a reliable medium for logical thought," and where written language is perceived "as the
primary medium of, first, authoritative knowledge, and lately of all higher cognitive capacities" (para. 3).

Methodology
         Both  deductive   and inductive  analyses  were    used for  qualitative data   following   grounded     theory  and
constant comparative methods (Glaser & Strauss, 1965). The study followed teachers and students who participated
in a district-wide, one-to-one laptop initiative where all teachers and students received wireless, laptop computers.
The study began at the beginning of the school year when the district was entering its second year of the laptop
program.   The  researcher  documented    how   six high  school    English  teachers    integrated technology    into   their
classroom instruction and how students responded to the use of laptop computers in their classes. The researcher
conducted  59  classroom   visits and  interviewed  each  teacher   and  10  focus  students.  In   addition, she  collected
descriptions of class assignments and invited each teacher and over 120 students to complete two online surveys. All
interviews were   audio recorded   and   transcribed.  During    analysis, the researcher  noted    common     patterns   and
inconsistencies in responses. She noted and coded all information that directly related to research questions and that
revealed teachers' views of literacy learning and technology integration. When patterns emerged during analysis, the
researcher revisited and coded data that had been collected to see if they confirmed initial findings. When patterns of
responses appeared to be supported with more than one example and by more than one participant, the researcher
noted this and continued to analyze and code for these patterns. Using the software program Nvivo, she periodically
searched through data to see if new codes supported initial findings. This searching, rereading, and coding process
continued until no new codes emerged.

Findings
         Although teachers had various opportunities to participate in technology workshops, were involved in the
laptop initiative for over a year, and were supported by administrators who wanted a stronger emphasis on problem-
based learning, findings revealed that teachers' predominant uses of technology were to organize information for the
sake of efficiency and to use the Internet for information seeking purposes. During class, students used technology
for both academic (e.g., taking notes, giving presentations) and personal (e.g., viewing music videos, writing instant
messages to friends) reasons. Although the level of integration varied across classrooms, the majority of observed
instructional practices continued to reflect the typical I-R-E (initiation, response, evaluation) pattern and teacher-led
discussions that are common in many high school English classrooms (Applebee et al., 2003). Findings related to
teachers' conceptions of English instruction and technology help shed light as to why their pedagogical practices did
not change. Findings also reflected how teachers struggled to see how technology could play a role in enhancing
student learning  and  English instruction. Despite   a district-wide,   professional development    focus    on  technology
integration, teachers' views of literacy learning and ways of knowing appeared to remain very "logocentric," placing
an emphasis    on how   meaning    is made  through    language   and  text  (Lemke,   1998).  Teachers'   perceptions    of
technology integration and their subject matter reinforced these views and often resulted in a use of technology that
mirrored their usual,  ongoing  classroom   practices.  For  example,  one   teacher  clearly stated her views    when    she
commented    how  English  class  consisted of  mostly  "reading,   writing, and  discussing."  She   then stated   that  she
believed technology    did not  play   a "prominent    role"  in the  English   classroom.    When   comparing     students'
engagement during class, a second teacher's views of English education and technology were revealed. He described
how "there are still plenty of students who just love to write with a pen. And those are the students that will become
English  majors  probably."  A third  teacher's revealing   comments   were    made   when she  described     the process of
teaching students  to  write essays   and   conduct   research.  She  explained   how    students   had to first   learn  the
"traditional" way and "imitate first, innovate later." She added, "Then you can play with technology, but first you
have to do it the proper way. First you have to do it with slates and chalk then you can get into all the other stuff."
She then added, "It doesn't enter my mind that it can be done the right way with technology the first time." When a
fourth teacher described her views about technology and the research process, she described how laptops were used
more for   "individual research   and  development"    rather  than  for   collaborative and  group   work.   All  teachers'
comments supported and reinforced the limited use of technology that was observed in each classroom.

                                                            85                                                     CSCL 2007
Conclusion
   Research has revealed that instead of actively engaging students in practices that support literacy learning, the
typical pattern of instruction found in high school classrooms is teacher-centered and places a heavy emphasis on the
transmission  of  information.   Applebee    and his  colleagues   (2003)  have  argued  that such  patterns of   classroom
instruction actually hinder rather than help the education of students. Viewed from a sociocognitive perspective, this
type of instruction provides "very little room for the exploration of ideas, which is necessary for the development of
deeper understanding" (Applebee et al., 2003, p. 689). This study revealed how specific views and beliefs about
technology and English education might limit teachers' efforts or desires to use technology in more innovative and
collaborative ways.  The   study     provides additional  insight  into the   challenges and  complexities   that surround
technology integration. It also highlights areas of research that need to be further investigated if teacher educators,
researchers, and administrators hope to promote change in teachers' classroom instruction. As researchers continue
to explore the various ways in which technology can facilitate knowledge-building in collaborative spaces, they
should also  explore effective   ways   for conveying   this knowledge     to classroom  teachers. As new    information is
shared, researchers should also look closely at the ways in which teacher education and professional development
programs are (or are not) impacting individual's views of technology integration and their conceptions of subject
matter learning.

References
Alvermann,    D.  (2000).  Grappling     with  the big  issues  in middle   grades literacy  education. Keynote    address,
         National Educational Research Policy and Priorities Board's Conference on Curriculum, Instruction, and
         Assessment in the Middle Grades: Linking Research and Practice, Washington, D.C., July 24-25, 2000.
         Retrieved June 15, 2005 from http://www.middleweb.com/alvermann.html.
Applebee, A.,     Langer, J., Nystrand,   M.,  &   Gamoran,     A. (2003).  Discussion-based   approaches    to developing
         understanding: Classroom instruction and student performance in middle school and high school English.
         American Educational Research Journal, 40(3), pp. 685-730.
Borko, H., & Putnam, R. (1996). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research on
         teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (2000). Multiliteraices: The beginnings of an idea. New York, NY: Routledge.
Cuban, G. (2001). Oversold & underused: Computers in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1965). Awareness of dying. Chicago: Aldine.
Goodson,  I.  F., & Mangan,      J. M. (1995). Subject  cultures   and the  introduction of classroom   computers.  British
         Educational Research Journal, 21(5), 613-628.
Hennessy, S., Ruthven, K., & Brindley, S. (2005). Teacher perspectives on integrating ICT into subject teaching:
         Commitment, constraints, caution and change. Journal of Curriculum Studies. 37(2), 155-192.
Howland,  J., &   Wedman,     J. (2004). A   process  model  for   faculty development:  Individualizing technology    with
         technology during field experiences. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 12(2), 239-263.
Jewitt, C., & Kress, G. (2003). Multimodal literacy. New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
Kerr, S. T. (1991). Lever and fulcrum: Educational technology in teachers' thought and practice. Teachers College
         Record, 93(1), 114-136.
Lagrange, J. B., Artigue, M., Laborde, C. and Trouche, L. (2001) A meta study on IC technologies in education:
         Towards a multi-dimensional framework to tackle their integration. 25th Conference of the International
         Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Utrecht), 1, 111-125.
Lemke, J. (1998). Metamedia literacy: Transforming meaning and media. In D. Reinking, L., M. McKenna, Labbo,
         & R. Kieffer (Eds.), Handbook of Literacy and Technology: Transformations in a Post-Typographic World.
         Mahwah,     NJ:   Lawrence      Erlbaum.     Retrieved  October    1,  2006,   from  http://www-personal.umich
         .edu/~jaylemke/reinking.htm.
Leu, D.J., Jr., Kinzer, C.K., Coiro, J., Cammack, D. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies emerging from the
         Internet  and  other    information  and  communication     technologies.   In R.  Ruddell  &  N.   Unrau  (Eds.),
         Theoretical   models    and   processes   of reading,   Fifth Edition  (pp. 1568-1611).   Newark:   International
         Reading Association.
National Council    for   Accreditation  of   Teacher  Education    (NCATE).    (2006).  Professional   standards  for the
         accreditation of schools, colleges, and departments of education. Washington, DC: NCATE. Retrieved July
         30, 2006, from http://www.ncate.org/public/unitStandardsRubrics.asp?ch=4.
Rogers, L. (2002). Learning science with ICT: How do teachers make a difference? The CeNTRE Seminar Series on
         the Relationship between ICT and Specific Subject Disciplines (Coventry).

                                                              86                                                  CSCL 2007
