 Supporting controversial CSCL discussions with augmented group
                                             awareness tools

                                            Jürgen Buder, Daniel Bodemer
                                  Psychological Institute, University of Tübingen
                             Email: j.buder@iwm-kmrc.de, d.bodemer@iwm-kmrc.de

         Abstract: An experimental study investigated the influence of an augmented group awareness tool
         on controversial online discussions    and  decisions  made   by  4-person learner  groups. The study
         employed an informed minority paradigm where one group member holds a correct viewpoint, but
         is faced with a 3-person majority holding an incorrect viewpoint. Within this paradigm, groups
         using an augmented group awareness tool based on learner ratings of agreement and novelty of
         contributions were compared to groups using a standard online discussion tool. It was shown that
         majority influence  occurred  in   unsupported   groups, whereas  augmented   group   awareness tools
         strengthened  minority influence,   as indicated  by  group   decisions and individual   correctness of
         decisions.

Introduction
         Since the early 1990s the notion of awareness has figured quite prominently within the field of CSCW
(computer-supported cooperative work). The concept of awareness is rather vague, but there is some agreement that
it refers to the perception and knowledge of contextual variables about the material and social world that surrounds a
person or a group (Endsley, 1995). This paper seeks to empirically explore the question whether the concept of
awareness can be fruitfully adapted and applied to the field of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL).

         There is a huge diversity of how the term awareness is employed in the literature, and several attempts have
been made   to categorize this field  (e.g. Carroll, Neale, Isenhour,   Rosson   &  McCrickard;   2003;  Christiansen   &
Maglaughlin; 2003; Gross, Stary & Totter, 2005). For the purpose of this paper it is sufficient to state that we make
a distinction between situational awareness (knowledge and perception about the material environment surrounding
a person) and group awareness (knowledge and perception about the social environment surrounding a person). This
paper involves an inquiry into group awareness, i.e. knowledge and perception about the presence, the activities, and
the products of other persons in a collaborative setting.

Group Awareness
         Group awareness is comprised of several elements, among them knowledge and perception of who is there,
where other persons are located, where they are looking at, and what they are doing (Gutwin & Greenberg, 2002). It
is evident that group awareness is easily available in face-to-face (FTF) scenarios. However, once group members
are spatially separated, group awareness has to be facilitated by means of technological support. Consequently, the
use of group awareness technologies has become widespread in digital environments, ranging from lists of active
users in online discussion forums (who is there) over avatar embodiments in virtual environments (where are they
located, where are they looking at) to video screens, shared scroll-bars in collaborative editors, activity indicators,
timelines, and other widgets used in shared workspaces (what are they doing).

         Against this background our own research on group awareness and development of group awareness tools
departs in two directions. Our first extension of group awareness refers to the type of information that participants
receive about their group. Group awareness is a natural by-product of FTF interaction. Consequently, many CSCW
approaches try to re-establish FTF conditions by technological means. Most examples of group awareness tools refer
to information about the group and its members that would be easily available in FTF settings (e.g. seeing who is
there, seeing what others are doing). While providing FTF-like conditions by technological means is a legitimate
goal for systems  designers, we  would  argue   that the  true power   of  technological  support can be shown    only  if
technologies give rise to kinds of interaction that actually surpass FTF levels to some degree. The focus of our own
research therefore  is on augmented    group  awareness    tools  that provide   information that would  be   difficult or
impossible  to yield in FTF  interaction.   More specifically,   our tools are   designed to provide  information  about
entities having no physical equivalent, e.g. on non-observable psychological constructs like knowledge, attention,
attitudes, preferences, or emotions.

                                                            90                                                  CSCL 2007
         The principle of augmentation is far from novel. Therefore, our own research draws heavily from work in
the field of social navigation (Höök, Munro & Benyon, 2002). Social navigation describes the various influences
that the visualization and feedback about other users' behavior has on the navigational behavior of an individual.
Many   forms  of  social  navigation  focus   on    so-called  recommender     systems   where    an individual's   choices are
informed   by recommendations     of  other persons.     Social  navigation   can either  be direct  (i.e. users explicitly rate
certain items which leads to recommendations for other users), or it can be indirect where the online navigation of
users will be captured in order to gain information about their preferences. The latter method is popular in online
book stores where products will be recommended on the basis of the purchasing behavior of customers who bought
the product one is currently inspecting. Augmented group awareness tools employ social navigation principles (e.g.
taking user ratings about non-observable entities) and combine them with group awareness principles. E.g., unlike in
social navigation the information will be collected from group members one is actually interacting with, rather than
from an anonymous collective. Moreover, the provided information does not refer to external products like books,
but to products created by the particular group one is belonging to, viz. their discourse contributions. In this respect
augmented group awareness tools are a hybrid between social navigation tools and classical group awareness tools.

         A   second  extension   of   classical group    awareness    research   that our work    is exploring   relates to the
application of augmented group awareness tools to the field of CSCL. Very few attempts have been made in this
direction, and the few applications in this field either focus on observable entities like learner activities (thus being
classical group awareness tools) or provide information for the observing scientists rather than the group itself (cf.
Jermann  et  al., 2001,  for an  overview).   It is  an  open   question   whether    groups make    use   of awareness-related
information, how they use it, and if the use reflects in different kinds of group behavior. In any case augmented
group  awareness    tool  provide   a somewhat       novel  technology     metaphor.   While   some   CSCL     approaches   use
technology as an unstructured medium (potentially leading to learner disorientation), and while other approaches
rely on rather directive means of structuring collaboration (potentially leading to overscripting; Dillenbourg, 2002),
augmented    group  awareness   tools provide    a   middle  ground   between    these two   extremes.  They   are  designed to
engender completely autonomous, but well-informed learner actions.

         We have set out to explore the use and usefulness of augmented group awareness tools for collaborative
learning scenarios. Our current work focuses on a general group awareness tool that is designed to support both
synchronous and asynchronous forms of online group discussions. The basic idea here is to require learners to rate
the written contributions in an online discussion on one or more dimensions. The tool itself performs the functions
of a) taking the learner ratings as input; b) aggregating and/or transforming these inputs; and c) visualizing and
feeding back transformed contextual variables as graphical output to the group. In this way learners are informed
about the current state of the group with respect to some contextual variables in real-time.

Minority Influence in Collaborative Learning
         In order to test the usefulness of these augmented group awareness tools we applied them to a particular
scenario  of  collaborative  learning,  viz.    the  case   of  controversies  and    conflicting viewpoints.    According   to
educational theorizing, controversies and conflicts are often seen as important antecedents of collaborative learning
(Doise   & Mugny,    1984).   Some    collaborative     learning  methods    are  even  specifically  tailored   to engender  a
controversial discussion   among    learners,   e.g. Structured     Controversy   (Johnson   &  Johnson,    1992).  Despite the
potential of controversies to facilitate elaboration of and negotiation among learners, there might be some pitfalls to
these methods. The social psychological research literature points at various deficiencies of controversies because
they can give rise to patterns of social influence that might be detrimental to a group's functioning, particularly if the
sub-groups   advocating   the  viewpoints    are    of  different   size. For  instance,  there is   an  abundance    of social
psychological  literature that points  at the   difficulties   that minorities in a   group  have  on   influencing   conflicting
majority viewpoints   (Asch,   1956),  especially    if the task  at hand  is not demonstrable    (i.e. a  particular viewpoint
cannot easily be proven to be a correct one). If this robust finding is applied to collaborative learning one can only
assume that controversial discussions in a learning domain are also prone to the influence of a majority, irrespective
of the validity or justifiability of the majority viewpoint. Generally, the suppression of minority viewpoints would be
detrimental to collaborative learning because it prevents groups from gaining divergent, flexible perspectives on a
particular domain. These detrimental effects of lacking minority influence are even exacerbated when the minority
holds  a scientifically  correct viewpoint      that fails  to  influence   an incorrect  majority   perspective.   Given   that
collaborative learning requires the joint construction of a shared understanding it could well be the case that in such
a scenario the minority would rather comply with the incorrect majority perspective than vice versa.

                                                               91                                                      CSCL 2007
         In  the context   of group-decision   making   these   patterns of  social influence   are   often investigated    in a
quantifiable manner by employing so-called hidden profiles (Stasser & Titus, 1985) with an informed minority. In
these scenarios a minority group member receives unshared, critical information that should lead to a different, but
better group decision quality than the shared pieces of evidence that the majority members receive. In addition to the
general finding that groups are often unable to uncover a hidden profile (i.e. identifying the best alternative) studies
employing an informed minority have shown that groups focus less on critical (minority-held) information when the
task did not appear to be demonstrable (Stewart & Stasser, 1998), that minority influence was even diminished when
groups were using an anonymous group decision support system (McLeod, Baron, Marti & Yoon, 1997), and that
the discovery    rate  of the best decision    alternative (out  of three)   was only   10%    using  an   informed    minority
(Brodbeck, Kerschreiter, Mojzisch, Frey & Schulz-Hardt, 2002).

         However,     social psychology    has also outlined  several conditions   that should   lead  to enhanced     minority
influence. These beneficial principles are important because they informed the particular design of our augmented
group   awareness  tool.  For instance, it  was   reported that  minorities  exert more  influence    over  majorities   if they
appear consistent in their argumentation even in the face of controversy (Moscovici, 1976). If members consistently
perceive that there is a conflict in the group, efforts to resolve conflict and seek for a resolution are likely to be
maintained rather than ignored. A second important antecedent for minority influence stems from the theoretical
distinction between normative and informational influence (Deutsch & Gerard, 1955). The influence of a majority
on the minority is normative, i.e. minorities often conform to the majority viewpoint because of social pressure. The
influence that a minority can have on the majority, however, is usually informational influence, i.e. majorities will
be more likely to conform with a minority viewpoint if the arguments brought forth by the minority are particularly
persuasive. Similarly, Nemeth (1986) has reported that a key factor in minority influence is the potential novelty of
the arguments brought forth.

         The design of our augmented group awareness tool for the informed minority scenario was building on
these principles   via two   mechanisms.   First, group  members    were  required  to  rate   their agreement    with a given
contribution. Because     one could   expect   that average  agreement   with   minority    contributions   is lower   than  for
majority contributions, the visualized arithmetic means of agreement ratings should visually separate majority and
minority contributions. This would serve as a constant reminder to the group that a conflict might still exist between
viewpoints, thereby precluding false consensus. Moreover, this visual separation of contributions should enhance the
consistency   of the   minority  viewpoint.  Second,   group   members   were    required   to rate  the  novelty  of  a given
contribution. Here one could expect that the novelty of majority contribution is rated as relatively low (because
majority arguments are shared, and tend to be redundant), whereas minority contributions should yield high novelty
ratings. By   emphasizing     on the  redundancy    of contributions  by   a majority   its  normative   influence   might   be
decreased, whereas informational influence of the minority should be increased by focusing on their novelty. Thus,
by making the unique contributions of a minority salient, it was expected that their influence on the (incorrect)
majority viewpoint would be increased. A specifically designed group awareness tool requiring ratings of agreement
and  novelty  should   therefore  lead  to strengthened    minority influence.  This   should  be    reflected in better group
discussions,  and  due  to using   an informed    minority paradigm   lead   to better group   decisions   and  learning.   This
hypothesis was explored in an experimental study.

Method
         In  the study,   small  groups of four   learners used  a text-based   online discussion    environment   in  order   to
come to an agreement on a conflicting physics topic. Similar to the informed minority paradigm (Stewart & Stasser,
1998), learning material, consisting of pieces of evidence, was previously distributed across the group members in
such  a  way  that one  learner  ­ the  informed    minority ­  received information    that should   lead  to a  scientifically
correct viewpoint on the issue, whereas three other learners (majority members) received information that should
lead to a plausible, but incorrect viewpoint.

Design
         Two experimental conditions were compared that differed with respect to the support learners received
regarding the awareness of other group members' contributions during the online discussion. While learners in the
control condition were only provided with an online discussion environment, learners in the treatment condition
were additionally provided with a rating-based augmented group awareness tool.

                                                              92                                                     CSCL 2007
Participants
         64 students (26 males and 38 females, ages 19 to 31; M = 22.05; SD = 2.35) at the University of Tübingen
were randomly assigned to the two experimental conditions and ­ within the small groups ­ to the minority or to the
majority. They were paid for their participation. To prevent a very high level of prior knowledge physics students
were excluded from participation.

Materials
         The application domain was comprised of physics concepts concerning light propagation.

         The instructional material was taken from the web-based inquiry science environment WISE module "How
far does light go" (Bell, 1995). The entire pool of learning material consisted of six pieces of evidence concerning
light propagation.  Two    pieces of evidence   were  in line  with  a scientifically plausible,  but  incorrect  viewpoint
("Light dies out"), whereas three pieces of evidence were supporting the scientifically correct viewpoint ("Light
goes forever"). A sixth piece of evidence was irrelevant with respect to the conflicting viewpoints. The six pieces of
evidence  were distributed   across  the group  members    prior  to  the  group   discussion   according  to the informed
minority paradigm of Stewart and Stasser (1998). The three majority members received four pieces of evidence
each: two (shared) information pieces supporting the incorrect viewpoint; one (unshared) information piece about
the correct viewpoint;   and the  irrelevant  piece of evidence.  Taken    together,  the  information   distribution in the
majority was identical to a hidden profile, i.e. each member would be more likely to prefer the incorrect alternative
based  on   shared  information,  whereas   a group's  preference   should   shift towards   the correct  alternative if the
unshared information pieces were pooled during discussion. The fourth member of the group (informed minority)
received all six pieces of evidence which should lead to a preference for the correct viewpoint. Prior tests revealed
that this type of information distribution predicted learner preferences quite accurately, i.e. independent learners who
received the same material as the minority, tended to favour the correct viewpoint, whereas learners who received
the same material as the majority, were biased in favour of the incorrect viewpoint.

         The online discussion environment used in both experimental conditions was developed at the Knowledge
Media Research Center in Tübingen as part of the groupware system VisualGroup (in its current version renamed as
Bebop).  It enabled  the  small  groups  to discuss in a text-based    and synchronous    way.   Contributions   were  listed
sequentially in temporal order. To control for effects of acquaintance among participants actual names were replaced
by neutral handles ("person A" etc.), i.e. contributions were made anonymously. The group awareness tool provided
to the small groups in the treatment condition was embedded into the online discussion environment. It consisted of
(1) seven-point Likert rating scales that allowed learners to rate each contribution (except their own) with respect to
(a) the agreement    with  a contribution,  and  to (b)  the  novelty  of  a contribution    in  the discussion,  and  (2) a
visualization of the contributions represented as dots on a two-dimensional graph, where the x-axis represented the
average agreement rating, and the y-axis represented the average novelty rating that a given contribution received.
The   visualization was  personalized in  that learners  could  distinguish  their  own   contributions   from other  group
members'    contributions, and  by indicating  contributions  a learner   hadn't   rated yet (Figure  1). By  clicking on  a
particular dot in the visualization learners could read the corresponding contribution.

                    Figure 1. Screenshot of the visualization used (translated from German).

                                                            93                                                    CSCL 2007
         The   test material for  assessing  the  knowledge    of the learners consisted  of  two  test sheets  that were
individually administered before and after group discussion. The first test sheet required participants to state their
preference for one of the two controversial viewpoints, and to indicate their confidence with this rating. The second
test sheet which was administered after the discussion asked learner to state the decision that the group arrived at.
Moreover, learners were required to indicate their individual preference for one of the controversial viewpoints, and
a confidence rating for the individual decision.

Measures
         Group decisions (correct vs. incorrect decision) were extracted from the contents of the group discussions.
Since subjects were also individually required to explicitly state the group decision after the discussion, these data
could be used in cases where the actual group decision was not evident. It was expected that groups in the treatment
condition would make better group decisions than groups in the control condition.

         Measures of learning were derived from the decisions among the two conflicting viewpoints that both the
groups and the individuals made after discussion. In order to gain access to a rough indicator of individual learning
the preferred  decision alternative and   the confidence  ratings  were  used  to calculate   a correctness   value of the
decision ranging from 0% (wrong answer and confidence rate of 100%) to 100% (correct answer and confidence
rate of 100%). It was expected that in treatment groups (with augmented awareness tool) minorities would exert a
greater influence on the group decision, thereby yielding higher correctness values across group members.

         Discussion   parameters   were   derived as  indicators  for knowledge   building  processes.  Log   files of the
discussion contents were used to generate general measures of participation (e.g. number of written contributions).
The   discussion content   was   additionally coded   by  two  independent   coders.  Single    contributions  were  rated
according to   three categories  (knowledge   construction; negotiation  of preferences;  others). It   was  expected  that
groups in the treatment condition would display a lower number and rate of contributions rated as negotiation of
preferences because the visualization already contained the corresponding information. As a consequence, it was
tentatively hypothesized that this might lead to a higher number and rate of knowledge construction contributions.
On the level of the whole group discussion sessions independent coders additionally categorized the deliberation
style of groups.    Deliberation style is a concept  drawn  from   research on   mock   juries. E.g., Hastie, Penrod   and
Pennington (1983) have found that some juries discuss evidence-driven, i.e. they start by exploring the evidence
before integrating the evidence into a verdict. Other groups, however, are verdict-driven, i.e. they start by collecting
and integrating individual verdict, and then start a (biased) search for information in support of this verdict. It was
expected  that without  augmented   group   awareness  tools   groups  might be   tempted  to   reach a consensus   overly
quickly, thereby employing a verdict-driven style. Due to the small sample size deliberation style of groups was only
analyzed in descriptive terms.

Procedure
         The   experiment   consisted  of two phases:  an individual   learning  phase, and   a  group  discussion  phase.
During the entire experiment subjects of a group were seated in separate rooms. In the first phase learners received
information  about   light propagation  individually (10  minutes).   While the  information    distribution was identical
across conditions, it differed within the small groups according to the informed minority paradigm of Stewart and
Stasser (1998), as described above. Subsequent to the individual learning phase, but prior to the group discussion,
individual preference and confidence were measured. After the learning phase individual group members were given
the opportunity to test the online discussion environment by writing contributions. Group members in the treatment
condition were additionally asked to rate test contributions by other participants.

         In the second phase groups were instructed to discuss the conflicting viewpoints. All learners were made
aware that other group members might have received different pieces of evidence. Groups were asked to make a
decision about   the  conflicting viewpoints   within the   allotted  discussion time (30  minutes).    According   to the
experimental design of the study small groups in the control condition were only provided with the online discussion
environment, while small groups in the treatment condition were additionally provided with the group awareness
tool. After the discussion phase individual learners were asked to repeat the group decision, state their individual
preference and indicate the confidence in their individual preference. Subjects were briefed about the study at the
end of the experiment.

                                                            94                                                   CSCL 2007
Results
Manipulation check
         Across both conditions, all minority subjects showed a preference for the correct viewpoint, as indicated by
pre-discussion choice.   However,  among   the  majority  members   only  41 out   of 48  subjects   chose the  incorrect
viewpoint. The distribution of pre-discussion choices between the two conditions was not different, i.e. out of the 7
subjects that did not adhere to the manipulation, 3 were in the condition without group awareness tool vs. 4 in the
experimental condition, thus yielding no significant differences between conditions ­ (2(1, N = 64) =          .68, n.s.).
Although  results  using actual pre-discussion  choice   as  independent  variable were   slightly more   favorable with
respect to the hypotheses, results described in this paper are based on the more conservative independent variable of
member status (majority vs. minority), as intended by the manipulation.

Group decisions
         Among     the eight groups  using the  augmented    group  awareness tool,   six arrived  at the  correct group
decision vs. two   for the incorrect decision.  In contrast, groups without  group  awareness    support   arrived at the
incorrect decision in six cases, at the correct decision in one case, while one group did not arrive at a conclusion
during the allotted time. The difference in arriving at the correct solution is significant between conditions (2 (2, N
= 16) =  6.57, p   < .05). This provides evidence   that augmented   group  awareness     tools were  reversing the   bias
towards majority opinion.

Individual correctness
         Table 1 shows the correctness values for minority and majority subjects within the treatment and control
condition. A 2x2 analysis of variance (ANOVA) with support and member status as independent variables yielded a
significant main effect for member status; F(1,60) = 4.74, p < .05. The main effect for support and the support x
status-interaction approached   significance (p =  .08 in   both cases). However,   the data    from Table 1 show     that
majority members in the treatment condition were scoring much higher than majority members in control groups.
An additional, one-tailed t-test revealed that this difference was highly significant; t(46) = 3.56; p < .01. In other
words, there is evidence for the hypothesis that majority members moved from the incorrect to the correct viewpoint
if they were using an augmented group awareness tool.

Table 1: Individual correctness values for learners across member status (majority vs. minority) and
support (treatment vs. control).

                                                                 Status
                                  Support           Majority Minority      Overall
                                  Control       M    37.17       78.63     47.53
                                                SD   36.89       32.51     39.76
                                  Treatment MSD      74.5836.02  78.3836.1875.5335.51
                                  Overall       M    55.88SD40.7278.5033.2361.5339.97

Discussion parameters
         Table 2 shows the absolute number of contributions written by majority and minority members across the
two conditions, separated by the three coding categories (knowledge construction, negotiation of preferences, other).
Results of 2x2-analyses of variance (ANOVA) indicate that members from control groups wrote more contributions
than group members in the treatment condition; F(1,60) = 21.75, p < .01. No differences were found for member
status or the support x status-interaction. A main effect for support could also be found by only taking into account
messages that were coded as knowledge construction contributions; F(1,60) = 5.70, p < .05. However, an analysis of
relative amounts of knowledge construction messages reversed this effect; F(1,60) = 6.49, p < .05. In other words,
treatment groups produced a higher relative amount of knowledge construction contributions than control groups (M
= .67, SD =.18 vs. M = .51, SD = .17).

                                                            95                                                 CSCL 2007
Table 2: Number of contributions across conditions that were coded as knowledge construction (KC),
negotiation of preferences (NP), or others.

                               Majority                         Minority                           Overall
 Support              KC           NP        Other      KC          NP       Other       KC         NP          Other
 Control      M       9.37       4.67        3.63     10.63        5.13      2.63       9.69        4.78         3.38
              SD      6.11       2.76        2.00       7.33       4.49      1.92       6.33        3.20         2.00
 Treatment MSD        6.212.86   2.211.38     .50       7.00       3.00      1.38        6.41       2.41.662.271.93.922.711.54.72.81
 Overall      M       7.79SD4.98 3.442.49    2.062.16   8.815.56   4.063.51  2.001.59    8.055.11   3.592.76     2.052.02

          The descriptive analysis of the groups' deliberation style indicated that seven out of eight control groups
were following   a   verdict-driven style. Four   of  the  treatment groups  were   using an   evidence-driven    style of
deliberation vs. three  verdict-driven   groups.  The remaining    two groups   in both conditions  were   not  uniformly
classified among raters. In others words, a deliberation style that started with collecting evidence before arriving at a
decision  was only   to be  found  in treatment   groups.  Additional  analyses revealed  that all four    evidence-driven
groups, the two mixed-style groups and only one of the verdict-driven groups arrived at the correct group decision.
In contrast, all verdict-driven groups made a decision in favor of the incorrect majority viewpoint.

Discussion
          An experimental   study  showed    that group using   an augmented    group awareness    tool showed    a  higher
performance in terms of group decision and individual correctness than unsupported discussion groups.

          On a larger scale addressing the entire CSCL community one of the most interesting findings of the study
was the fact that majority influence indeed occurred in the unsupported control groups. It was often mentioned that
CSCL tends to look at positive results, thereby neglecting instances where collaborative learning might actually fail.
Our studies have shown that in learning scenarios social psychological factors like majority influence are at work.
While this might not be surprising to social psychologists, this point is hardly addressed in the CSCL literature. We
hope that in the future findings from social psychology will be merged with findings from CSCL, thereby arriving at
a clearer picture of collaborative learning.

          While  it appears that collaborative    learning groups  might arrive at  suboptimal solutions   because   of an
overpowering majority influence, our experiment indicated that this inherent bias can be overcome by technological
means. An    augmented   group  awareness    tool specifically  designed to focus  on learner  ratings  of agreement  and
perceived novelty significantly increased minority influence, thereby leading to better group and individual learning
performances. Of course, in natural learning settings it is not always the case that a correct minority is facing an
incorrect majority.  However,   it can be  expected   that minority  viewpoints frequently occur,  and     they tend to be
overlooked, irrespective of their correctness. Therefore, augmented group awareness tools should contribute to a
more thorough consideration of diverse viewpoints, a goal that probably aligns with a huge range of CSCL accounts.
The  benefit of  allowing  for diversity was  also  illustrated in our analyses of  deliberation style. Whereas     control
groups were frequently focusing on finding an initial verdict, followed by identifying supporting evidence, it appears
that the augmented group awareness tool used in the treatment groups led to a much more open, evidence-driven
discussion before groups settled on a decision.

          Although outcome measures indicate differences between conditions the more general question of what
mechanisms might have produced the obtained results were not explicitly addressed thus far. In other words, what
parts of the augmented group awareness tools were conducive to strengthened minority influence? On the one hand,
simply requiring learners to rate contributions might lead them to reflect on the content, to serve as a metacognitive
prompt, and thereby leading to minority influence and better learning outcomes. This potential effect would hold
even in the absence of a visualization. On the other hand, the visualization might exert specific influence on learner
behavior by making aspects of collaboration particularly salient (e.g. novelty of a contribution), thereby guiding

                                                             96                                                  CSCL 2007
learners' attention to relevant information. Of course, both mechanisms might as well work additively. We will test
these two conflicting explanations in a follow-up study that includes a ratings-only condition. Another interesting
question is what actually happens when a majority member shifts preference. Is it because convincing arguments
were brought forward (content-related) irrespective of their source, or is it because these arguments were brought
forward by a particular source (person-related). In our present experiment the identity of authorship was confounded
with the content, i.e. contributions in the visualization were color-coded with respect to the authors. The follow-up
study will disentangle these effects by either using a non-color-coded visualization of contributions (content-only), a
visualization that only displays the group members as dots (person-only), or a combined visualization.

Future Directions
         It is apparent that  the  augmented   group  awareness       tool used  in this  study  was  specifically  tailored  to
scenarios   of majority-minority   conflicts. However,     it can  be   assumed     that  the  general  type    of rating-based
augmented   group  awareness   tools can  be  adapted   to other   scenarios    as  well.  For instance,   other   studies could
investigate this tool not for group awareness, but for social navigation in a stricter sense by requiring learners not to
mutually rate their contributions, but to rate external sources like learning materials. For other scenarios it might be
suitable to visualize the given instead of the received ratings. Moreover, depending on the research question learners
could rate  contributions  on different  dimensions,  e.g.    liking, conclusiveness.    The   tool itself could   use different
means of aggregation and visualization. Whereas the tool in the current study was simply using arithmetic means of
agreement   and   novelty, other tools could  visualize standard      deviations (an   indicator of  the   degree  of  conflict),
correlations, or even make use of advanced statistical procedures like cluster analysis and factor analysis in real
time. Finally, it will be an interesting question to compare direct social navigation (explicit ratings) with indirect
social navigation where learner behavior will be implicitly captured. In the social navigation literature indirect social
navigation  algorithms  are  often regarded   as superior  because     they  do  not   burden  subjects    with the potentially
tiresome  task  of rating  contributions. However,    our     discussion   on the   explanatory     mechanisms     for minority
influence in this experiment might indicate that this additional burden might be a key factor in producing favorable
learning results.

Conclusions
         We believe that augmented group awareness tools enrich our repertoire of CSCL technologies both for
practical use and for scientific inquiry. Whereas some considerations for the scientific investigation of these tools
were addressed in the preceding section, it is evident that practical use of augmented group awareness tools faces
additional hurdles. Issues of learner compliance and scalability across group sizes are the first that come to mind.
Research into practical use of these group awareness tools might be conducted in mobile learning scenarios, thereby
taking into account affordances and constraints of this particular technology.

         In terms of the scientific analysis of tools we believe that they are open to investigations based on a range
of epistemologies (Suthers, 2006). While many processes involved in collaborative learning can be made visible and
quantifiable with these tools, thereby lending themselves to an experimentally-oriented epistemology of knowledge
communication, it is of course possible to hermeneutically describe and analyze knowledge building processes that
take  place during  group   discussions, and  examine   the   ways    they  unfold  under   the  influence   of  ratings   and/or
visualizations. On a final note, it should be repeated that augmented group awareness tools as described in this study
stand for a potentially new   philosophy  of  learner guidance.    While    they   are far from  being   as directive  as  other
methods (e.g. scripted cooperation), they avoid the pitfall of leaving collaborative groups without any guidance.
Being well-informed, but fully autonomous might be an interesting metaphor for collaborative learning that is well
worth studying in entirely different contexts of CSCL.

                                                              97                                                       CSCL 2007
References
Asch,  S. E.   (1956).  Studies  of  independence  and   conformity:  A   minority  of  one  against a  unanimous    majority.
          Psychological Monographs, 70 (whole no. 416).
Bell, P.  (1995). How    far  does  light go?:  Individual  and collaborative   sense-making   of science-related    evidence.
          Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco (poster presentation).
Brodbeck, F., Kerschreiter, R., Mojzisch, A., Frey, D. & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2002). The dissemination of critical,
          unshared   information    in decision-making    groups: The   effects  of  pre-discussion  dissent. The  European
          Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 35-56.
Carroll,  J. M.,  Neale,   D. C.,   Isenhour,  P. L., Rosson,   M.  B., &     McCrickard,   D. S. (2003).   Notification   and
          awareness: Synchronizing task-oriented collaborative activity. International Journal of Human-Computer
          Studies, 58 (5), 605-632.
Christiansen, N & Maglaughlin, K. (2003). Crossing from Physical Workspace to Virtual Workspace: be AWARE!,
          Proceedings    of  HCI    International  Conference    on   Human-Computer       Interaction,  Lawrence    Erlbaum
          Associates, New Jersey 1128 ­ 1132.
Deutsch, M. & Gerard, H. B. (1955). A study of normative and informational influence upon individual judgement.
          Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 629-636.
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Overscripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design.
          In P.   Kirschner   (Ed.), Three   Worlds   of  CSCL:   Can   we   support  CSCL?    (pp.  61-91).  Heerlen:  Open
          Universiteit.
Doise, W. & Mugny, C. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford: Pergamon.
Endsley, M. (1995). Towards a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems. Human Factors and Ergonomics
          Society, 37(1), 32-64.
Gross, T.,   Stary, C.  &  Totter,  A.  (2005). User-Centered    Awareness    in Computer-Supported      Cooperative    Work-
          Systems:   Structured   Embedding     of Findings  from     Social  Sciences. International   Journal   of Human-
          Computer Interaction, 18, 323-360.
Gutwin,   C. &   Greenberg,   S. (2002).   A  descriptive framework    of workspace    awareness  for   real-time groupware.
          Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 11, 411-446.
Hastie, R., Penrod, S. D. & Pennington, N. (1983). Inside the jury. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Höök, K., Benyon, D. & Munro, A. (Eds.) (2002). Designing Information Spaces: The Social Navigation Approach.
          London: Springer.
Jermann,   P., Soller,  A.  &  Mühlenbrock,     M.  (2001).  From   mirroring    to guiding: A  review   of  the  state of art
          technology for supporting collaborative learning. Proceedings of Euro-CSCL 2001, 324-331.
Johnson,  D.   W.   &  Johnson,  R.  T. (1992).   Creative  Controversy:   Intellectual Change    in the Classroom.     Edina:
          Interaction Book.
Konstan,  J.   A.   &  Riedl, J.  (2002)   Collaborative   Filtering: Supporting    Social  Navigation   in Large,   Crowded
          Infospaces.   In K.  Höök,    D. Benyon     &  A. Munro     (Eds.), Designing    Information  Spaces:   The   Social
          Navigation Approach (pp. 43-82). London: Springer.
McLeod, P., Baron, R. S., Marti, M. W., & Yoon, K. (1997). The eyes have it: Minority influence in face to face and
          computer mediated group discussion. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 706-718.
Moscovici, S. (1976). Social Influence and Social Change. London: Academic Press.
Nemeth, C. (1986). Differential contributions of majority and minority influence. Psychological Review, 93, 23-32.
Stasser, G.  &  Titus,  W.   (1985).   Pooling of  unshared information   in  group  decision  making:   Biased   information
          sampling during discussion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1467-1478.
Stewart, D.D. & Stasser, G. (1998). The sampling of critical, unshared information in decision-making groups: The
          role of an informed minority. European Journal of Social Psychology, 28, 95-113.
Suthers, D. D. (2006). Technology affordances for intersubjective meaning making: A research agenda for CSCL.
          International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 315-337.

                                                              98                                                     CSCL 2007
