   Boda Blocks: A Collaborative Tool for Exploring Tangible Three-
                                  Dimensional Cellular Automata

                                          Leah Buechley and Mike Eisenberg
            Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO USA
                                     buechley@colorado.edu, duck@colorado.edu

       Abstract: Construction kits like traditional building blocks provide excellent media for face-to-
       face collaborative interaction.   The complexity and expressive power of these kits are increasingly
       being augmented with computational elements like controllable lights, motors and sounds. This
       paper introduces a computationally enhanced set of building blocks, Boda Blocks, which allows
       for collaborative   interaction    through the   construction   and    programming  of tangible   three-
       dimensional cellular automata.      We  provide   a brief   introduction   to computationally enhanced
       construction kits, describe the Boda Blocks system and report on the results of a preliminary user
       study.

Introduction
       Construction kits   constitute   a venerable tradition   in the design    of  educational toys. Kits allow     for a
relatively unselfconscious medium in which children can work both alone or in collaboration; unlike (on the one
hand) explicitly solitary activities such as reading, or (on the other) explicitly group-oriented activities such as board
games, construction kits allow for both individual contemplation and group discussion.

       Researchers and designers have recently begun to integrate computation and construction kits          in various
ways. This trend began in the 1970s when architectural researchers (Frazer 1994; Aish 1979) built beautiful kits for
architectural modeling. Such kits have entered the educational realm more recently (Eisenberg et al. 2002; Resnick
et al. 1996). The Active Cube (Watanabe et al. 2004) and Topobo (Raffle 2004) projects, as well as the work of
Wyeth et al. (2002) and Zuckerman et al. (2005) are especially inspiring examples of educational kits.

Boda Blocks
       This paper describes a computationally-enhanced construction kit, Boda Blocks. The kit, shown in Figure 1,
is a set of 16 luminescent cubes that can be arranged in a variety of configurations and programmed, via companion
software, with cellular automaton rules to display dynamic three-dimensional patterns of light and color.

                    Figure 1. Boda Blocks: the physical kit and the programming interface.

     Each block is always in one of three states: blue, green, or off. Boda Block constructions are in one of two
modes at any given time. In the interacting mode, users can program the blocks with cellular automaton rules and
use the switches on individual blocks to set a construction's initial state. (Pressing a switch on a block cycles its
state from blue to green to off.) In the executing mode, constructions evolve according to the cellular automaton
rules with which they have been programmed. Users can change the physical configuration of a construction at any
time by adding blocks to it or removing blocks from it. Thus, there are four actions that are undertaken with the kit
during its two modes: constructing, programming, initializing and observing.

                                                            99                                                   CSCL 2007
       Cellular automata are mathematical models that explore how local rules, executed in discrete time steps, can
result in complex global patterns (Ilachinski 2001). Cellular automata are usually implemented on a computer screen
on a grid of colored "cells" (the squares in the grid). Cells can display their "state" through their color, and can
communicate   with their  immediate   neighbors  (usually   the squares  surrounding   them).    As a cellular automaton
develops in discrete time steps, each cell computes what its state will be at time t+1 based on its state and the state of
its neighbors at time t; the patterns that evolve in a particular cellular automaton are dependent on the initial state of
the grid.

       Cellular automaton   rules  for the Boda   Blocks    are  defined using    the  cellular automaton   programming
software, shown in Figure 1. This software allows users to experiment with a specific class of cellular automaton
rules. This class of rules, termed outer-totalistic (Ilachinkski 2001, p. 45), allows users to specify a block's next
state based on its current state and the collective behavior of its neighbors.

       Any blocks that are part of a construction will be reprogrammed with the new rule set when it is sent; blocks
that are not part of the current construction will not be reprogrammed.        We would like to call attention to the fact
that this design allows for the interesting possibility of constructions with heterogeneous rules; that is, a single
construction may contain blocks that have been programmed with an assortment of rules.             During the executing
phase, a construction functions as a parallel computer. Each block simultaneously and independently communicates
state information to and receives state information from its neighbors (any blocks that are attached to it) and then
independently updates its state based on its personal rule.

Preliminary User Testing
          We recently held the first user test of the Boda Blocks system.      The test took place in our lab with a group
of four children ages 11-14, two females and two males. The questions we were most interested in answering at this
preliminary stage were: "Is the kit usable?" and "Is the kit engaging; is it capable of maintaining sustained user
interest?" Our principal means of assessment for these questions was observation.         We took several photographs,
and noted down interesting quotes, but otherwise did not impose on our users.          The remainder of this section will
report on this initial study, highlighting issues surrounding collaboration.

          The four children spent approximately one hour interacting with the Boda Blocks system.         A pile of blocks
and connectors was placed on a table, and users could sit around three sides of it to interact with the system.        A
laptop was provided for the block programming activity. To begin the Boda Blocks session, a workshop leader (the
first author) explained the Boda Blocks phases and activities: constructing, programming, initializing and executing.
The participants  then quickly    began building  constructions    with  their   pile of blocks  and connectors.     They
experimented with a few different configurations, but after building the tower form seen in Figure 2, did not return
to the construction activity.    The rest of the session    was  spent experimenting     with   different rules and initial
configurations set on this form.

                                     Figure 2. Users interacting with Boda Blocks.

          Once the tower was built and connected to the computer, each child was given the opportunity to program
the construction in turn. While one child manipulated the programming interface, the other children either worked
on setting the initial state of the blocks, observed executing behavior, or assisted the programmer with her task.

                                                            100                                                  CSCL 2007
Figure 2 shows images of typical interaction: in the left image, two children interact with the kit simultaneously
while one observes; in the right image, two children collaborate on the programming activity while a third works on
setting the blocks' initial configuration.

         The interaction was immediately highly collaborative and remained so throughout the session.         Participants
kept up an ongoing and lively discussion about the rules, initial states and dynamic patterns.    Interaction between the
programmers   and    block  manipulators    was  coordinated  and  productive.    Initially, the participants    seemed to
somewhat randomly experiment with rules and behavior, but as they observed interesting patterns--one that died
out for example--they attempted to modify the rules and starting state to obtain intentional results--a pattern that
did not die out, or one that oscillated.

         The users also became immediately engaged in predicting the behavior of their constructions.            Given an
initial state and a rule, they would almost always embark on a period of collective speculation and initial state
modification before executing their construction.      Often the observed behavior would confound their expectations,
usually because they had neglected to fully think about all three dimensions. For example, expecting an oscillating
pattern on a horizontal    plane, users    were surprised when   their construction  evolved   into a seemingly    random
flashing pattern. After first protesting that "the blocks are broken!" the users then reset the initial configuration and
realized that they had neglected to take vertical interactions into account.   This pattern of experience was repeated
many times throughout the session, with users periodically experiencing three-dimensional "aha" moments.

         At the end of the session we felt that we had achieved a good informal indication that our kit was indeed
useable and engaging. Since our assessment was based entirely on observation we cannot be certain that each of the
participants completely understood the system and felt comfortable with it, but our initial findings were positive.     As
has been detailed, the users built their own constructions successfully and were quite capable of interacting with the
system with very little intervention.      All  of the users seemed    to quickly understand   the  relationship  between
programs, the blocks' starting states and the patterns that they observed in the blocks.

         We also found that the kit sustained the users' interest throughout the one hour session. Somewhat to our
surprise, the children remained independently engaged and actively explored different rules and behaviors without
outside prompting.   As was stated above, we did periodically intervene to make sure that each child had a turn at the
computer to program the blocks, but other than that we did not structure the experience.          Participants seemed to
genuinely enjoy working with the kit.      Indeed, the participants were reluctant to leave the workshop at the end of the
session, as they were immersed in attempting to get their construction to exhibit a desired behavior.

References
Aish, R. (1979). 3D Input for CAAD Systems. Computer-Aided Design, 11:2, 66-70.
Eisenberg, M., Eisenberg, A., Gross, M., Kaowthumrong, K., Lee, N., and Lovett, W. (2002). Computationally-
         Enhanced    Construction   Kits    for Children:  Prototypes   and  Principles.  In  Proceedings     of the Fifth
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences, 23-26.
Frazer, J. (1994). An Evolutionary Architecture. Architectural Association: London.
Ilachinski, A. (2001). Cellular automata: a discrete universe. World Scientific. River Edge, NJ.
Raffle, H (2004). Topobo: A Constructive Assembly System        with Kinetic Memory. In Proceedings of CHI 2004.
Resnick, M., Bruckman, A., and Martin, F. (1996). Pianos Not Stereos: Creating Computational Construction Kits.
         Interactions, 3:6.
Watanabe et al. (2004). The Soul of ActiveCube ­ Implementing a Flexible, Multimodal, Three-Dimensional Spatial
         Tangible Interface. ACM Computers in Entertainment, 2:4.
Wyeth,  P. and    Wyeth,   G. (2002).    Electronic  Blocks: Tangible     Programming    Elements   for Preschoolers.   In
         Proceedings of CHI 2002.
Zuckerman   O.,   Arida S., Resnick  M.    (2005). Extending    Tangible  Interfaces for Education:   Digital Montessori-
         Inspired Manipulatives . In Proceedings of CHI 2005.

Acknowledgments
We would   like   to thank  the University   of Colorado's   Science   Discovery  program,   Nwanua   Elumeze,    Yingdan
Huang, Jaime Catchem, Mark Gross, Clayton Lewis, and all of our workshop participants. This work was funded in
part by the National Science Foundation award no. 0326054.

                                                            101                                                  CSCL 2007
