Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   111

                               CSCL for Schools that Learn
James M. Laffey, Dale R. Musser, Linda Espinosa, Herbert Remidez Jr., Joshua S. Gottdenker,
                                          Ran-Young Hong, Chris Amelung
                               Center for Technology Innovations in Education
                                           University of Missouri-Columbia
                                                LaffeyJ@missouri.edu
ABSTRACT
Learning communities and organizations are being recognized both as a mechanism for bringing learning about and as an
explanation  of  what learning  takes place.  Systems    that support  learning in   context and  collaborative     learning  are
increasingly being used to support performance and learning for school reform and business productivity. Similarly, many
of the  performance  and  learning outcomes   that we   care  the most about,  e.g., higher order thinking,     problem solving,
communication competencies, are understood as developing in the authentic activity of a community, such as a profession,
a trade, or an academic discipline. Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) is a method for bringing the power
of technology to support collaborative and contextual learning. This article argues that CSCL can be a framework for
school reform, not just as a method of curriculum implementation, but also as a framework for enterprise-wide, process
change. The article will also illustrate how cscl-type systems can facilitate schools becoming learning organizations, not
just organizations that support learning.

Keywords
Learning communities, CSCL, school reform, learning systems

INTRODUCTION
The work of Lave and Wenger (1991) provided leadership in showing how professions and disciplines have communities
of practice wherein learning takes place through experience and induction takes place through apprenticeship. They argue
that learning is not a type of activity, but rather is an aspect of all activity. Wertsch (1998) and others taking a socio-cultural
approach have shown that the "intelligence" of actions is only meaningfully understood in the context of knowledge about
the cultural tools invoked. Similarly, Donald Norman's book, Things That Make Us Smart (Norman, 1993), shows how
technology does not simply improve the way we do things, but actually changes what we do. Multiplying with a calculator
is a different mental and physical task then is multiplying with paper and pencil. These works have helped frame a view of
cognition as distributed and a stance toward facilitating learning that calls for situated and social practice.
Scardamalia and Bereiter (1994) concur with the movement to view learning as a social practice, but argue that situating
learning in communities of professional practice does not serve school-based learners. Scardamalia and Bereiter developed
a framework of a knowledge-building community that emphasizes intentional learning of curriculum objectives as the
product of the educational community of practice. Their vision for how computers could support the collaborative learning
of school curriculum has provided a foundation for the development and implementation of CSCL for school reform.
Along with new curriculum models, such as situated and collaborative learning, advances in digital media and network
technologies provide opportunities and expectations for school reform. To that end the U.S. Department of Education states
as a   primary goal that, "Digital content  and networked    applications will transform  teaching and learning"      (Office of
Educational Technology,    2000).  These   expectations for  transformation and improvement    in teaching      and learning  are
fueled by (1) dramatic increases in the levels of access to technology in our nation's schools (e.g., the percent of schools
with Internet access increased from 35% in 1994 to 95% in 1999. (Williams, 2000)), and (2) the experience, common to
almost all citizens, of change through information technology in so many aspects of life (business, entertainment, medicine,
etc.).
Hope for improvement, however, is tempered by the recognition that even with substantial increases in access to technology
the impact on public education has been limited. After a yearlong process of review and hearings, the Web-based Education
Commission summarized the impact of Internet-based technology on education as: "Across America, people told us that the
Internet offers one of the most promising opportunities in education ever. And yet they were troubled by their inability to
harness its potential advantages" (Web-based Education Commission, 2000). Referring to an earlier wave of technology
and its expectations for school reform, Larry Cuban provided a one-line synopsis: computers meet classroom; classroom
wins. This epithet of computer assisted instruction indicates that even with substantial investment and great efforts at
reform the role of computer assisted instruction was at best marginal and did not change the ways that teachers and students
worked in classrooms. Current investments in wiring schools and bringing Internet access to teachers and students face the
same challenge of actually making a difference in the ways that schools work, teachers teach, and students learn.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page   112

In The Fifth Discipline (Senge, 1990), one of the seminal management books of the last 75 years, Peter Senge described
new ways of working and communicating that enable an organization to thrive in challenging and changing times and
achieve  a sustainable  competitive  advantage.    The    term "learning  organization"  was coined    to emphasize   the  need  for
organizations to get smarter about their work by learning from experience. Just as we know that individuals get smarter
(becoming better at understanding conditions, solving problems, and judging solutions) through experience, feedback and
discipline (ways of thinking about their experiences and feedback), so to do organizations. Senge's book described five
disciplines (ways of thinking) that facilitate organizational learning. The five disciplines are:

   Personal Mastery - personal empowerment through the identification and realization of a personal vision
   Mental Models - processes of reflection and inquiry that make tacit knowledge visible and shared.
   Shared Vision - establishing and nourishing a common purpose
   Team Learning - enabling teams to think, learn, and mobilize for change (motivated by a commitment to a shared
    vision)
   Systems    Thinking   - ways of  thinking    in  which    understanding  interdependency     and   "change  processes"  lead to
    appropriate solutions to complex problems.
In  some   ways  all communities  are  learning   communities     or they   would cease  to exist,  but  high  performing  learning
communities can be defined as enterprises that place a high value on developing the capacity to learn, see learning as the
outcome of the authentic activities of that community, use the outcomes of learning as scaffolding for future activity, and
enable activities as social practices (e.g., not bound by arbitrary isolation of individuals, such as individual seat work in
school). These same principles that have been applied in the service of business productivity and improvement can also be
applied to improving the school as a system and organization.

COMPUTER SUPPORT FOR LEARNING ORGANIZATIONS
Nearly 40 years ago Douglas Engelbart working from early experiences with communication technologies and a vision of
the future  with new   and   advancing     technologies   formulated  a framework    for "augmenting"     the human   intellect and
improving human productivity that fits well with a model of distributed cognition and situated learning. By augmenting he
meant "increasing the capability of a man to approach a complex problem situation, to gain comprehension to suit his
particular needs, and to derive solutions to the problem." (Engelbart, 1962, p. 1). Considering the worker, the learner, and
the work situation as an integrated whole with conditions that negate or facilitate "increasing capability." was fundamental
to Engelbart's framework and links his work to distributed cognition and to Senge's model of a learning organization.
Engelbart's work was a seed for later efforts at computer-supported collaborative work (CSCW), electronic performance
support systems (EPSS), and most recently a set of knowledge management systems with names, such as, ERP (enterprise
resource planning), CRM (customer relationship planning) and SCM (supply chain management), etc. Von Krogh, Ichijo,
and Nonaka (2000) stress that improved business practices come from implementing knowledge management systems in a
"knowledge creating" company. They stress that "knowledge creation" calls for new roles and responsibilities for everyone
in the organization so that innovation can be nurtured and new knowledge can be created, shared, and used for sustained
advantage   and  productivity. The   work    of  seeing   organizations  as knowledge    creation   enterprises takes  the learning
organization   framework    provided by    Senge  and   maps   it to the  power   and potential  of  information  technology    and
knowledge management systems.
Similar to the substantial investment to place technology in schools and the apparent limited return on this investment,
business investment in information technology experienced a "productivity paradox" from the 1960's into the 1990's. Critics
claimed and had ample evidence in support of their case that huge investments in technology had not led to increased
business productivity.  In  a comment      that parallels the  line from  Larry Cuban    about   computers  in  schools, the  Nobel
Laureate Economist Robert Solow characterized the results of technology in industry: "we see productivity everywhere
except  in the  productivity  statistics." More  recent   analyses  of  productivity show   that in  the late 1990s technology    is
substantially contributing to productivity. Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1998) summarized the recent research by declaring that
"computers are pulling their weight." They suggest that the question is no longer "Does technology payoff?" but rather,
"How   can  we  best  use   technology?"   The   research shows,    however, that just   investing  in technology  does   not bring
improved   productivity.  Some   firms     with high investments     in technology   have  shown    gains  and  others   with equal
investments have failed to show gains. A study funded by IBM (IBM Business Consulting, 2001) with collaborators from
academia and business publishing associated the contributions of technology to productivity gains with a focus (1) on
customers, (2) business process transformation, and (3) organizational learning.
The lessons learned about deriving productivity gains from technology investments learned in industry and summarized in
the IBM report are a guide for thinking about systems design and implementation in schools. Many of the technology
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page   113

implementations we see in schools today are beneficial, but substantial school improvement will not occur because of one
teacher in an elementary school who uses technology, or a few projects done in the middle schools, or even an entire, but
single  school,  in  a district with  advanced     uses of technology.   Similar  to ERP   (enterprise  resource    planning),   CRM
(customer relationship planning) and SCM (supply chain management) systems in business, schools need enterprise wide,
networked systems that implement school processes in ways that contribute to student learning outcomes. As educators and
developers our understanding and ability to develop these systems are still quite primitive, but new network-based learning
systems   are coming    into  use  that  offer the possibility of  integrating  curriculum experiences    and  student    information
systems. These new systems can help change the metaphor of the Internet from library to workspace and the metaphor of
student information from report card to feedback in a systems model. We will call these integrating and process oriented
systems Networked Learning Systems (NLS). An NLS is defined as a program or set of programs designed to operate over
a network and support users as they undertake tasks or participate in processes related to learning. One framework for these
systems   for K-12   is   to build out   the student  information  system  into  a   web-based  tracking   system.    These  systems,
PowerSchool by Apple Computer is a strong example, offer great advantages for school management and administration
and  assist  the  instructional   process  as  well  as  providing   new  linkages   between   parents  and    school    teachers and
administrators. Another model is to build-out the cscl-type systems that are emerging in schools to support teaching and
learning  so  as to  include  information    management    systems  that foster  collaboration  and   new  roles in   the educational
enterprise  for  all participants,  students,  teachers,  administrators,  and  parents. This   paper  argues    for  using  a CSCL
framework that places student work as the design center of the system. Focusing on the work of teaching and learning is
analogous to the focus on customers found to be associated with productivity gains in the IBM study. However, this agenda
will also be advanced by building the student information-type systems so as to be web-based environments for student
work, not just environments "about" student work.
A key educational implication of situated learning and the socio-cultural approach to understanding teaching and learning
actions has been to set a goal of providing students with participation in the authentic work of communities of practice.
Lessons   learned   from  the   research on    business productivity   suggests that we  need   to also consider     the  school  as a
community of practice for doing "school." Schooling can be improved by understanding the practices of its participants and
creating environments and systems to help the school be a learning organization.

SCHOOLS AS LEARNING ORGANIZATION
In Senge's most recent book, Schools That Learn (Senge et al., 2001), the five disciplines are applied against the challenges
and problems of schools. This approach allows educators and policy makers to see the school as a learning community, not
just in the   traditional framework     of students  learning  the school  curriculum,   but in the   sense of   an  organization    or
community that needs to get smarter about how it works, takes on challenges and mobilizes for school improvement.
Schools That Learn references the role that technology (e.g., email or conferencing) can play in facilitating the actions of
communication and sharing. However, Senge focuses upon institutional innovation, and fails to show how technology can
be used to change ways of thinking and ways of working. Donald Norman's book, Things That Make Us Smart (Norman,
1993),  shows    how   technology   does   not  simply   improve   the way  we   do  things, but   actually changes    what    we  do.
Multiplying with a calculator is a different mental and physical task then is multiplying with paper and pencil. Having a
door that is designed in a way that indicates that you should push when actually you should pull will lead to lots of less than
dumb actions. This insight allows designers and developers to create systems that allow people to act as they are able and
amplify, transform, and extend their work to new or additional outcomes. Efforts to build knowledge management systems
so that  information    collected  in one    part of an  organization  can be   used  to make   decisions   in another    part of  the
organization (over time or distance) has been a powerful tool in organizational improvement. Brown and Duguid (2000)
argue that information-driven technologies lead to a tunnel vision, and that the implementation of technology needs to be
grounded in the social life of the institution rather than in the information space. This argument recognizes that learning and
knowledge are the result of multiple and intertwining forces of content, context, and community, and that similar to Senge,
these authors see the need to harness the richness and diversity found in the community members of the organization.

USING CSCL TO SUPPORT THE SCHOOL AS A LEARNING ORGANIZATION
How can schools change the way they work and realize productivity gains of similar magnitude as those being realized by
businesses? We believe that Senge's five disciplines can serve as guide for schools as they attempt to answer this question,
and  that  recent advances    in  networked    technologies  empower     schools to  implement   the  five  disciplines   of learning
communities in ways that have not been possible heretofore. The remainder of this article illustrates how one such systems,
Shadow    netWorkspaceTM      (SNS)   (Laffey,  Musser,  and   Espinosa, 2000),  supports  ways    of working    that enact  the  five
disciplines.
SNS is a web-based work environment designed and developed specifically to support K-12 schools. Much like a personal
computer's desktop SNS provides a personal workspace for organizing, storing and accessing files and an environment for
running applications. Figure 1 shows the personal desktop view of the SNS interface. The desktop has a navigation dock to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                    page  114

the left side, an information bar along the top of the window, and an application space that in this view shows the personal
desktop of the user. The desktop provides access to data storage, groups and specialized tools. The top of the dock shows a
set of locations always available to the user. The middle of the dock shows the applications that are currently active but not
in the application view for  easy movement   between  applications, such as the address book, message board   and chat
currently shown. The bottom of the dock shows session control options. The bar shown in the figure indicates to the user
when they are running out of system rersources on the server and need to close down some active applications. Other
options available to the user include choosing the language (English, Spanish. Korean, etc.) of the interface or choosing the
theme (screen configuration, color scheme, etc.) that would be most appropriate for the current computing environment. For
example, an experienced user on a computer with a small monitor may choose to collapse the dock into a set of icons
leaving more space for the application window.

                                           Figure 1. SNS Personal Desktop
SNS provides the ability to create groups and for each group to have a "group desktop" analogous to the personal desktop
shown in figure 1 for file sharing, communication and collaboration. Because it is Web-based, teachers and students can
access their workspaces from any computer that can access the World Wide Web, and partners (parents or mentors), who
are unable to participate in schools because of time or distance, can participate in the internet-based workspace. SNS is
freely available to all users, designed to be installed at individual school locations, and comes with an open source (GNU
Public License) and Application Programming Interface (API) so others can develop applications for it and participate in
enhancing and supporting it.
SNS is both an information space for organizing, storing and accessing files, and a social space in that SNS users have roles
(e.g., teachers, students, parents, etc.) that structure the system interaction as well as groups for sharing, communicating and
collaborating. The next sections illustrate the ways in which SNS supports activities that instantiate the five disciplines and
build a learning community.

Personal Mastery.
Community   members   must   have a personal identity that both empowers  them  to achieve to a high level of personal
satisfaction and represent themselves in the community in a way that is coherent with their own self image. For example,
programmers in the open source community are empowered with tools (licenses, source code, web-based information and
sharing) and invest their time and resources to create interesting and powerful programs. These programmers want to share
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  115

their work freely with others who could benefit or learn from it. If the programs were made available anonymously there
would be far less drive to mastery, creation and sharing. SNS provides each member of the community with an identity and
an extensive section for presenting a profile. SNS also provides substantial customizability for the desktop and organization
of files. Users in all roles can create groups, invite members to participate, invoke chat or other communication tools, and
share their  work    in multiple ways.   The name    "netWorkspace"   signifies that core  to  the design  of SNS   is a  work
environment, a place to accomplish a variety of types of work, and one which is resourced, connected and customizable.
The   workspace  facilitates   students having a  personally meaningful   identity   in school   that is associated with  their
accomplishments, so that they will see themselves as a part of the school community.

Mental Models.
Mental models are guides to behavior. Much like the set of expectations we have for going to a restaurant causes us to take
a seat, order food, and pay for it before leaving. Our expectations and models for how the world works and how we will
work within it guide our actions and the sense we make of the actions of others. Senge argues that we need to have a clear
understanding (or visible representation) of our mental models as well as the mental models of those with whom we work.
Reflecting on our own models is how we will change them or adjust them to best fit the situation. Inquiring into the models
of others is how we come to understand their actions as goals and intentions, not simply behaviors. Central to the processes
of reflection and inquiry are ways of making these assumptions visible, so that they can be examined and communicated. A
way of thinking about this idea that especially fits schools is to think of making learning visible. Making learning visible
challenges the learner to represent what they know and enables the teacher or learning partner to not only see an answer but
to see the underpinnings and mechanisms that generate that answer. Much like asking a student in mathematics to show
their work of calculating an answer we want students to show their work in all forms of learning.
SNS supports making learning visible by: (1) providing online tools for creating multimedia content, providing a special
viewer application for examining media, and facilitating the sharing of most document types, (2) allowing users to organize
and store documents so that iterative steps toward a final production can be maintained and shared, and (3) supporting
multiple reviewer types (including teachers, other students, parents, mentors from in and outside of the local community) so
that the teacher does not have to be the only source of review and feedback. One of the key barriers to examining mental
models or making learning visible is the lack of time and the pressure to cover subject matter. Since the student's workspace
is available wherever they have an Internet computer or appliance, teachers can create teaching materials for asynchronous
teaching and learning. It may be unreasonable to expect many teachers to create many materials, but teachers and other
members of the extended school community could collaborate to develop instructional materials and have a common and
easily accessible platform for implementation.

Shared Vision.
The articulation and sharing of mental models provide individuals with the opportunity to discover other individuals with
similar mental models and personal visions. This discovery can lead to the aggregation of individuals into groups and the
identification and shaping of a shared vision. This shared vision serves to motivate individuals and foster commitment to
learning and action (Team Learning). Key to building a shared vision is participation and inclusion of all the stakeholders in
the learning community. By providing a social context for participation (members have roles with appropriate rights and
authority), easily   available grouping  techniques, and an  easy  to use interface,    SNS supports   the participation of all
appropriate members and facilitates their interaction and sharing.

Team Learning.
How can members of a community interact and mobilize to achieve common goals so that the collective effort is greater
than what could be accomplished by isolated individuals? SNS makes it easy for schools to setup classes with teachers, but
also allows any member to create workgroups or review groups. Each type of group provides different rights and privileges
for the members of the group. For example, in a class group students cannot throw a document created by the teacher into
the trash, whereas in workgroups all members have equal rights and responsibilities regarding the managing and editing of
files. Workgroups can be setup for the purpose of a group of students working on a team project, teachers collaborating on
curriculum development, or students forming a chess club. Review groups allow an individual to organize a set of work for
review by others. Review groups could be setup for the purpose of an electronic portfolio, a science fair exhibit, or having a
teacher, student, guidance counselor, truant officer, and parent collaboratively review a students work over time. To date,
SNS provides the three group types described above, but other group types could be developed based upon new definitions
of roles and rights.
Being in a group of a certain type provides affordances and constraints for what the member can do, and what can be done
with documents. Within a group, members can invoke discussion boards or chat sessions whenever appropriate. The user
experience is that of easy and flexible group formation, various communication tools, and file sharing and security. Just as
the name    "netWorkspace"      communicates   an environment   for   personal   mastery,   it represents  customizable   work
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  116

environments for teams and groups. The groups and types of groups in a learning community can change as the need for
new types of social interaction emerge over time.
The review  panel, as an example,   illustrates how  the feature set of SNS  can   be  used  to support the  type of  process
transformation that can be valuable to schools and has been associated with productivity gains in the IBM study. Feedback
and evaluation of student work is one of the most important processes of schooling. Typically feedback is only provided by
the primary teacher and only on the current work effort. Portfolios are recognized as mechanisms that allow students to
aggregate work into meaningful chunks and provide for more extensive review. In practice, however, portfolios have many
problems. Physical portfolios are cumbersome and it is difficult to mange the review process for more than a very small
number of students. Electronic portfolios usually call for technical skills on the part of the producer or reviewer that often
yield weak approximations of the goal of appropriate and extensive feedback to important work by the student. The Review
Panel Group of SNS facilitates both the work of the portfolio producer and reviewer. An example desktop for a review
panel group is shown in Figure 2. In this case the group is being used by the member, Jim Laffey, for a review called
"Interface Design Review." The desktop provides a file storage space called Portfolio. In this space the owner can place any
documents (including word processing, spreadsheets, graphics, or video) that are to be reviewed. The owner can arrange
these documents in folders, and thus has a great deal of presentation flexibility. The owner can provide instructions for
reviewers, as well as an introduction to him or herself and to the work to be reviewed. Communication tools such as
discussion boards or the ability to leave notes are available. The owner can use the Member Editor tool to invite reviewers
to the portfolio. If the reviewer is a member of the SNS community, the Review Panel will show up in that members
Groups. If the reviewer  is not a  member  of   the SNS  community,   for example    a college  admissions  officer, then the
invitation process creates an email or letter to be sent to the non-member reviewer with a specialized password that will
admit the reviewer to this panel but not to other areas of the SNS community. For students using SNS to carry out their
regular school work the creation of a portfolio is an easy process of copying files from their personal workspace or other
group space to their new portfolio space. Reviewers have easy access to the files and communication tools for collaborating
with other reviewers or interacting with the student. If specialized scoring or grading is required new applications could be
developed  and added  to the desktop. This  review   panel example   illustrates how   the key  steps and transactions of  an
important process of schooling can be facilitated in a networked learning system.

Figure 2. Desktop of Review Panel Group

Systems Thinking.
Senge calls systems   thinking the fifth discipline of learning  organizations,  and  entitled  his seminal book,  The  Fifth
Discipline, to highlight how important systems thinking is to bringing the benefits of the other disciplines to bear on
knowledge creation and learning. While there is much to be understood about systems thinking, the practice of systems
thinking starts with a simple concept called "feedback." Feedback provides the information needed to recognize causality,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page     117

to see patterns, and to understand the interrelationship of phenomena. If NLS become places where much of the important
work of schools is done or represented, then representations of this work can be viewed, reviewed, and monitored for
patterns and relationships. While it is certainly possible to build NLS that represent unimportant or non-critical aspects of
the work of schools, and build elaborate systems models that will lead to no substantial improvement in schools; the hard
and creative work of systems thinking is drilling down to the essentials and core focus of the enterprise. The report from
IBM suggests that information systems in business must be clearly tied to the effect of work on customers, and its is likely
that in schools NLS must focus on students and student work. Neither SNS nor any other NLS that we have examined
claims much progress in providing the core feedback needed for school improvement. One of the goals of NLS developers
who have created open source licenses for their work is to build communities of users so that the shared experience of the
school communities can provide feedback to the NLS development, which in turn can lead to systems that improve over
time and experience.

SUMMARY
Networked   Learning   Systems  hold  great potential   and promise    for school improvement.   The    rapid deployment    of
technology into schools and the relentless advancement of technology for digital representation and network services for
information and work, call for "ways of thinking" that will turn schools into learning organizations in the fullest sense of
the term. Although substantial investments and deployment efforts are being made in schools, the scope of this work is
miniscule when compared to the experience and lessons learned over the past 40 years of bringing information technology
to bear on business productivity. Lessons from this work may not be directly translatable into school practices, but they
point us towards a focus on student work, enterprise wide systems, and mapping technology use to process improvement in
the organization. Further the work undertaken in the business community focuses our attention on turning schools into
learning organizations that not only work to support student learning, but also work to improve their ways of working. NLS
can be a substantial contributor to helping schools become learning organizations.
Systems like Shadow netWorkspace are early and somewhat primitive instances of the environments we envision for
schools as learning organizations. These systems must advance through evolutionary and learning processes of their own.
Schools  must  adopt NLS   and  begin the process   of  fundamental change   to management,    organizational  structures  and
human resource allocation that these systems will enable. NLS as a vision in schools has been impeded by limitations in
access to technology (not every child and/or parent has a computer and computers are not in all the places we want them to
be) and limitations in bandwidth (some things just are not worth doing over a 28.8 modem connection). However, we are
already seeing instances of schools where every child has a laptop and it is not hard to imagine a future where in many
schools  every child has   some form  of  PDA.   Similarly,  wireless  connections and Internet2  connections   into schools
foreshadow ubiquitous high bandwidth. Our implementations of NLS and our ways of thinking about schools need to
advance, so that as ubiquitous access becomes a reality, we will have schools that can learn to bring these new network
services to bear on improved teaching and learning.
The foundational work of scholars such as Scardamalia and Bereiter for using computers to support collaborative learning
can be a basis for enterprise wide systems that focus on the total process of teaching and learning. If we do not find creative
ways to make the work of student learning the design center for knowledge management systems, we will end up with
knowledge management systems for schools that fail to represent the real work of schools, and we will have failed to learn
from the lessons of the "productivity paradox" in business.

REFERENCES
Brown, J. S. & Duguid, P. (2000). The Social Life of Information. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press
Brynjolfsson, E. & Hitt, L. (1998). Beyond the productivity paradox. Communications of the ACM 41, 8, 49-55.
Engelbart,  D. (1962). Augmenting    Human   Intellect: A   conceptual framework,  summary     report, SRI International.  On
         Contract AF 49(638) 1024.
IBM Business Consulting. (2001). Beyond the productivity paradox: New views on the value of information technology.
         www.ibm.com/services/whitepapers/productivity.html
Laffey, J., Musser,  D. &   Espinosa, L.  (2000) Shadow     netWorkspace    Learning Systems    Project. Proceedings    of the
         International  Workshop  on   Advanced   Learning    Technologies.   (Palmerstown    North,   New    Zealand), IEEE
         Computer Society. pp. 188-189.
Lave, J. &   Wenger,   E., (1991) Situated  learning:   Legitimate peripheral  participation. Cambridge,   U.K.: Cambridge
         University Press.
Norman, D. (1993). Things that make us smart : defending human attributes in the age of the machine. Reading, MA:
         Addison-Wesley.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                   page   118

Office of Educational Technology. (2000). e-Learning: Putting a world-class education at the fingertips of all children.
       Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1993-1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. The Journal of the
       Learning Sciences, 3, 265-283.
Senge, P. The fifth discipline. Doubleday, New York, NY, 1990.
Senge, P., Cambron-McCabe, N., Lucas, T., Smith, B., Dutton, J., & Kleiner, A. Schools that learn. Doubleday, New York,
       NY, 2001.
Von Krogh, G., Ichijo, K. and Nonaka, I. (2000). Enabling Knowledge Creation. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Web-based Education Commission.  (2000)   The power  of the    Internet for learning: Moving from promise to   practice
       (Report). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Wertsch, J. (1998). Mind as Action. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Williams, C. (2000). Internet access in public schools: 1994-1999 (NCES 2000-086). U. S. Department of Education.
       Washington, D. C.: National Center for Educational Statistics.
