Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   119

D. (METHODOLOGY TRACK): QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF SOCIAL
STRUCTURES

          Gender and Programming Achievement in a CSCL
                                                  Environment
                         Amy Bruckman, Carlos Jensen                              Austina DeBonte
                             Georgia Institute of Technology                          Microsoft
                             {asb,carlosj}@cc.gatech.edu                      austinad@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
In this study, we analyzed 3.4 GB of log file data from the participation of 475 children in a CSCL environment over a
period of five years. Using scripts to divide the children's commands typed into categories, we found that girls spend
significantly more time than boys communicating with others in the CSCL environment. Analyzing the children's level of
programming achievement, we found that gender does not affect programming performance. Regression analysis shows
that performance is correlated with prior programming experience and time on task. Boys are more likely than girls to have
prior programming experience, and spend more time programming on average. We contrast these quantitative findings with
our qualitative observations, and conclude that quantitative analysis has an important role to play in CSCL research. These
results suggest that educators wishing to increase gender equity in technical skill should focus on strategies for fostering
interest among girls.

Keywords
Gender, programming, learning, CSCL

A GENDER GAP?
Since the earliest days of the personal computer (and perhaps earlier), researchers have been asking questions about gender
equity in computer use. "If males and females participate differentially in computer learning environments, this could lead
to differences in cognitive attainments and career access," wrote Marcia Linn in 1985 (Linn, 1985). Linn studied organized
middle-school programming classes, and found that girls and boys have similar levels of programming achievement once
they enroll in classes, but that girls are less likely to enroll. In the following decade a number of researchers have studied
gender differences in how children learn and use computers both in schools and at home (for overviews see Bannert 96 and
Giacquinta 93) and the reasons behind these differences (Turkle 86). A number of studies have shown that girls tend to
have less exposure to computers. Studies have shown a strong positive relationship between prior experience and both
attitudes towards    computers  and achievement    (Kersteen   88,  Shashaani 94).   When  gender   role identity and   previous
experience are accounted for, boys and girls perform equally well (Colley 94).
Since Marcia Linn did her first study, much has changed about computers, access to technology, and how computers are
used at home as well as schools. However, the basic facts of gender and computing for kids have not changed: our results
replicate Linn's early findings. Most of the work to date has been done using surveys and attitudinal inventories. In this
study, we     use quantitative log  file analysis  as well  as  qualitative observations  and  interviewing   to  study  student
programmers    in  a mixed  school  and  free-time  use environment.  While   boys   develop  significantly more  programming
expertise than girls (25% difference, p=.004), regression analysis shows that in fact this difference is attributable to the fact
that boys chose to spend more time programming in the environment, and are more likely to have prior programming
experience.   Boys   are more  likely to  chose to  program    both before  and   during their exposure   to our  programming
environment, and time on task predicts level of achievement.

BACKGROUND: MOOSE CROSSING
In the spring  of  1992,  Amy   Bruckman    presented   a paper on  the fluidity  of identity in text-based  virtual worlds (or
"MUDs") to a student reading group at the MIT Media Lab. A few days later, Mitchel Resnick, then a graduate student but
about to join the faculty, posed a question to Bruckman: would it make sense to create a MUD based on the Babysitter's
Club   series of  books  to encourage    elementary and   middle-school girls  to be  interested in computers?    This  was the
beginning of the MOOSE Crossing project.
A new programming language ("MOOSE") and programming environment ("MacMOOSE") were developed to make it
easier for children  to  learn to program   (Bruckman,    1997; Bruckman    &  Edwards,   1999).  (A Windows     version of the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page 120

programming environment, "WinMOOSE," was developed a few years later.) The Babysitter series theme was abandoned
in favor of a more open-ended, gender-neutral theme. Rather than create an environment for girls, we decided to create an
environment we hoped would appeal to both genders, so that we could compare girls' and boys' activities there. However,
gender was soon relegated to a lower research priority, because there was simply so much fundamental work to do on the
basic nature of learning in this new kind of CSCL environment (Bruckman, 2000; Bruckman, Edwards, Elliott, & Jensen,
2000).
Children began to use MOOSE Crossing in the fall of 1995. Everything typed on MOOSE Crossing is recorded, with
written informed consent from parents and assent from children. In January 1996, then undergraduate Austina De Bonte
joined the MOOSE Crossing development team as part of MIT's Undergraduate Research Opportunities (UROP) program.
DeBonte (then Austina Vainius) wrote a series of Perl scripts to break down children's commands typed on MOOSE
Crossing into categories (see Table 1).
                                            DeBonte analyzed 700MB of MOOSE log file data from the first use by kids in
         Movement     in  the   virtual    September 1995 until April 1997. A total of 160 children participated during
          world                             this    time.  Comparing   girls   and boys    use   of each   of  these categories of
         Communication with others         commands,       she  found   no  significant   differences.   Girls  spent  more  time
         Consulting the help system        communicating with others online, and boys had a slightly higher percentage
         Looking    at   people     and    of     their commands   typed    in  other   categories;    however,   none   of  these
          objects                           differences were significant. At the time, we were disappointed in this result--
         Creation objects                  it    seemed  uninteresting. It is discussed   in  a few    pages of Bruckman's   PhD
         Seeking    information  about     thesis (Bruckman, 1997), but was not published elsewhere.
          others                            Five years later, we looked back at this result, and saw it in a new light. No
         Scripting텺anipulatingproperties  significant    differences is not  a   lack of results--it   is in  fact an  interestingobjectfinding. Consequently, Carlos Jensen dusted off DeBonte's Perl scripts, andrepeated the analysis on our greatly enlarged data set. Additionally, new scripts
         Looking at object properties      have been written to analyze children's level of programming achievement.
         Using   the   in-world   mailsystemDATA ANALYSIS
                                            Categorizing Activity
Through November 2000, 457 children have now participated in MOOSE Crossing. Of those, some children continue to
participate for many years, while others try the environment once and never return (see Table 2). This nearly 3-fold increase
in experimental subjects has led to a nearly 5-fold increase in the amount of log file data. As of November 2000, we have
3.4 GB of data (compared to 0.7 GB in 1997).
                                                            BOYS          GIRLS          ALL
                                                            4036.8        4914.9         4444.2
                             Mean
                             Standard Deviation             8906.2        17642.7       13662.5
                                     Median                  580            459            516
                                   Minimum                    2              5             2
                                   Maximum                  55709         177680        177680
                                 Table 2: Time on Task (Commands Typed) By Gender
In total, 46% of MOOSE users are girls, and 54% are boys. This is little changed from 1997, when 43% were girls. It is also
similar to the gender distribution on the Internet as a whole. While men dominated the Internet in the mid-90s, men and
women were roughly equally represented online by the turn of the century (Abernathy, 2000).
Participation on MOOSE Crossing is measured by counting the total number of commands typed by a member (see Table
2). Since a user might leave a connection window open without actually being present at the computer, connect time is not a
useful metric. Total commands typed is a better measure of degree of participation. Differences in time on task by gender
are not statistically significant. A few girls have extremely high participation rates (see Figure 4), leading to the mean
commands   typed  being  higher  for girls  while    the  median is higher   for   boys. Given      the highly  variable nature of
participation rates, median values are more indicative than means.
A typical entry in our log files looks like this:
16:05:38    #218     #78  >>>>   say     hi
16:05:40    #78   <<  You   say    'hi'
16:05:40    #99   <<  Amy   says,       'hi'
          Percent of commands

                              CommMuonviceamtieonnt
                                                    EBdCrirtoFieinwanStgsidieinnenPgrkggiSoncOpOPrgibebejjrpoteteHiipcMceeltnltasseigspl
                                                                                                  CustomiUzsiinngg LOOobbjjokeeiccnttgss
                                                                                                                                                             Other
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                              page    121

Data is stored in files for each day. Each line of input from the user consists of a timestamp, the unique identifier of the
room in which the user is located, the user's object number, and ">>>>", followed by what the user typed. Each line of
output presented to a user is proceeded by a timestamp, the user's object number, and then "<<", followed by what the user
saw. In the above log, Amy (player #99) is in Ginny's Little Cottage (room #218), and says hi. Ginny (#99) hears her.

                                                     Time on Task by Category and Gender
                               30%

                               25%

                               20%

                               15%

                               10%

                                5%

                                0%

                                                                                                                                                          Boys     Girls

                                                                          Figure 1

All transactions between client and server are also recorded, allowing us to see when the user looked at a particular object,
script, help message, etc. Simple regular expression matching enables us to sort more than 80% of commands typed into
categories (see Figure 1).
Only one gender difference in this chart approaches statistical significance: girls spend more time (as a percentage of total
commands typed) communicating with others compared to what boys do (marginal significance: p=.082). This trend was
also observed in the 1997 data analysis, but at the time was less significant. Time on task as measured by proportion of total
commands typed is a zero-sum game. While none of the other differences are significant, the fact that girls are spending
more time communicating means they are spending slightly less time than boys in almost all other categories.
We might infer from this that girls appreciate the social nature of the CSCL environment. It is unclear, however, what
impact if any this has on girls' learning. Conversation might or might not be contributing to their intellectual growth. We
have not analyzed what percent of the communication is "on task" (about programming or writing), versus being purely
social. Furthermore,                 even when        communication is purely social, it is not clear                                      to what extent this contributes to the
development of writing skills. Thus, this finding is intriguing but difficult to interpret.

Scoring of Student Achievement
In 2000,  we                   used portfolio scoring    techniques to analyze students'  programming                                         achievement on   MOOSE   Crossing
according to the following scale:
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                  page   122

                                                  0: Wrote no scripts
                                                  1: Demonstrated understanding of basic input/output
                                                  2: Used variables and properties
                                                  3: Performed list manipulation and flow control
                                                  4: Demonstrated mastery of all aspects of the system
These ratings were produced by two human raters. In cases where the raters disagreed, a third person rated the student's
level of accomplishment. This technique was applied to a random sample of 50 participants (Bruckman et al., 2000).
Subsequently, we became concerned that perhaps our categories were poorly designed. What if kids are learning commands
in an unusual order, learning some commands typically classified as "advanced" before others we think of as elementary?
Does this set of categories represent student achievement well?
Consequently, we developed a new 100-point achievement scale. Programming commands were divided up into categories:
input & output, string manipulation, logic, list manipulation, flow control, and documentation. Most of these categories
have sub-categories                       corresponding  to  specific  commands     or concepts.   In I/O there   are 8 sub-categories,  3 in   string
manipulation, 4 in logic, 8 in list manipulation, and 8 in flow control. Documentation is the only category that had no sub-
elements.
Each kid's scripts were examined for the use of all these elements, and an overall composite score was generated by
weighing the different elements according to the importance we assigned to them. Each element in the I/O category was
weighted by a factor of 3.5 (28%), strings by 2 (6%), logic by 3 (12%), list manipulation by 2 (16%), flow control by 4
(32%), and documentation by 6 (6%). This gives us an overall score on a scale of 1 to 100.
In fact, our concerns were unfounded: the old and new scores correlate well (see Figure 2). (The comparison is somewhat
strained by the fact that the new metric was taken a year later, and some of the students have continued to participate and
learn during that year but the others haven't.) Both new and old scales have the limitation that there are relatively subtle
differences between categories two and three. One advantage of the new automated technique is that we can analyze all
study participants instead of a sub-sample.

                                                                Old Versus New Programming Scores
                                              100

                                               90

                                               80

                                               70

                                               60

                                               50

                                               40

                                               30

                                               20

                                               10

                                                0
                                         Girls         0 Scores         1Scores          2 Scores        3 Scores         4 Scores
                                         All
                                                                              Old Programming Score s
                                         Boys

                                                                                Figure 2
On registering for                       MOOSE     Crossing, all  participants  are asked if they   have previous   programming     experience. Prior
experience is self reported, and generously interpreted. If a student reported any kind of programming experience (for
example, having authored HTML), this was counted as an affirmative response. Students with previous experience have
significantly higher levels of programming achievement (p=.001) (see Figure 3). The error bars show the extremely large
degree of variability in students' achievement. However, despite this variability, the large size of the data set means that the
effect is highly significant.
                  New Programming Scores
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                     page  123

                                                           Average Score by Experience and Gender

                           Previous Programming
                               Experience

                               No Programming
                                   Experience

                                 Average Score

                             Girls
                             Average             0     5    10    15    20    25    30    35                40    45    50    55    60    65
                             Boys                                                          Av e rage Score

                                                                 Figure 3

At first glance, boys have a higher level of programming achievement than girls (p=.004). However, regression analysis
shows that the difference is explained by prior programming experience (see Figure 3).
Regression analysis is a statistical tool for evaluating the relationship of a set of independent variables to a single dependent
variable. This method is particularly useful in situations such as this, where we cannot control the independent variables,
yet need to  determine     their   individual   effects.  Regression   analysis   seeks  to                take a set  of  data-points   and  find the
mathematical  equation     which    best  and   most  reliably  describes   the  given  data               set. The  resulting   equation serves   as a
predictor for the "weight," or "importance" of the different independent variables in relation to the dependent variable, and
to each other. In this case, we used a Least Square estimation method, excluding outliers (kids with more than 60,000
commands typed, kids who first used computers after the age of 13, kids who first started using MOOSE after the age of
16, or who spent more than 20% of their total time-on-task programming). Looking at Programming Score, the resulting
equation was:
            Programming Score = 5.595
                 + 3.589 * (if the subject has previous programming experience)
                 - 0.007 * (time talking to others)
                 + 2.93 *10-7 * (time talking to others)2
                 + 0.006 * (time on task)
                 - 1.03 *10-7 * (time on task)2
                 + 0.009 * (time spent scripting)
(Adjusted R2 = 0.76, S.E.=12.8, p<0.01 for all except Previous Programming Experience, p<0.05).
In other words, programming scores were positively related to time on task, time spent programming (effort), and previous
programming experience. Time on Task has a decreasing marginal return (its positive effect plateaus). Programming scores
were negatively related to the time they spent talking to others, or engaging in any activity other than programming. (time
on task is a zero-sum game). The negative marginal effect of time talking to others is lower the more they talk (it plateaus
as it becomes a predictor for continued membership). Gender, environment of use (home, school or other) proved not to be
statistically significant.
                       Programming Achievement
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                      page  124

                                                                       Programming Achivevement over Time on Task
                                               100

                                                90

                                                80

                                                70

                                                60

                                                50

                                                40

                                                30

                                                20

                                                10

                                                 0
                                                    0       10000    20000     30000    40000     50000    60000    70000     80000    90000    100000
                                               Boys            Girls                 Time on Task (Commands T yped)
                                               Log. (Boys)     Log. (Girls)
                                                                                         Figure 4

Programming achievement seems most directly related to the time spent in MOOSE as a whole, and more specifically on
programming within MOOSE. We therefore chose to look at the factors that determine how much effort the kids put into
programming on MOOSE. This resulted in the following equation:
              Time spent scripting = 66.42
                    + 48.19 (if the subject is a boy)
                    + 0.141 * (time talking to others)
                    - 5.153 *10-6 * (time talking to others)2
                    + 3.33 * (help commands)
                    - 0.003 * (help commands)2
(Adjusted R^2=0.61, S.E.=233.57, p<0.05 for all)
In other words, gender has an effect on the amount of time spent scripting. Interestingly, we find strong evidence for the
social nature   of MOOSE                               Crossing      and    the community      support    for    learning. This     can be    seen     by the  fact that
communicating with others is a strong indicator for time spent on scripting. The positive marginal effect of time talking to
others is lower the higher the level (i.e. at some point communication is not supporting learning, but rather purely social).
We also see that consulting the built-in help system has a positive, but marginally decreasing effect (again, the difference
between  looking   up                          something     and     randomly    accessing    help functions).      All   other factors  proved    to     be statistically
insignificant.
Self-Selected Versus Mandatory Use
Home users of MOOSE Crossing are self-selected. On the other hand, school users generally have no choice: they are
assigned to participate. It's not surprising, then, that home users have a higher average level of achievement -- they have
chosen  to participate                          of  their   own   free   will,  and   hence   have  higher    motivation.    (This    difference   is  not   statistically
significant, but the apparent trend is suggestive.) Interestingly, this difference is greater in girls than boys. Boys working
from home score on average 1.54 points higher (6.5% higher) than those working from school; girls working from home
score on average 4.98 points higher (35% higher) than girls working from school. (These figures are suggestive but not
significant.)
                                Average Score
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                         page  125

                                 Programming Achievement by Location of Use and Gender

                                              30

                                              25

                                              20

                                              15

                                              10

                                               5

                         Girls
                         All                   0
                                                      School Users          Home Users              Other Users
                         Boys

                                                                      Figure 5
This apparent trend is consistent with our other findings. Overall, girls tend to be less interested in programming than boys.
Those girls who self-select to participate are those who happen to be interested. Among the school-use population, girls are
less likely to be sincerely interested in the activity. Performance correlates with interest.

Comparison of Quantitative Findings and Informal Observations
Much  research  in   CSCL    relies           on qualitative data. Sometimes   this   data is  detailed and systematic    in its collection;
sometimes it is anecdotal. Log file data is easy to collect but difficult to interpret. For example, versions of the Logo
programming language generate "dribble files," but few studies have ever made sense of the data in them.
Since 1995,   roughly  a dozen  administrators             have  spent  hundreds   of hours   each, working  with     children  on MOOSE
Crossing. Through those interactions, we necessarily develop informal impressions of the comparative achievement of girls
and boys  in  the environment.  The              consensus   of these impressions  is that  the achievement     of the girls is  particularly
remarkable, and exceeds that of boys. These impressions turn out to be incorrect. As Figure 4 indicates, the top five
participants in terms of total commands typed are girls. A disproportionate amount of our interactions with users are with
these dedicated regulars, and this skews our impressions. Quantitative analysis forms a clearer picture. Quantitative analysis
is particularly valuable when working with the subject of gender, because opinions about gender are so susceptible to
ideology (Popper, 1971). CSCL researchers in general are vulnerable, as we were, to forming impressions based on the
behavior of their most active users. Quantitative analysis is a useful partner to qualitative for understanding CSCL systems.

CONCLUSION
We  initially designed the   MOOSE               Crossing  environment    with the goal    of encouraging  girls   to become   interested in
technology. Evidence suggests that we have been partly successful in that endeavor. Mouse1 (girl, age 9) says that she hates
math, but loves   to write programs              on MOOSE       Crossing. The  following   interview took   place   during an   after-school
program:
        Amy:      What's your favorite subject in school?
        Mouse:    Writing.
        Amy:      What kinds of things do you like to write in school?
        Mouse:    Stories about imaginary people.
        Amy:      Have you done any writing on MOOSE Crossing?
        Mouse:    Yes.

1 All real and screen names of research subjects have been changed to protect their privacy.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page 126

       Amy:     What kinds of things do you write on MOOSE Crossing
       Mouse:   Programs, and....
       Amy:     How is writing a program different from writing a story?
       Mouse:   Programming it everything has to be right, so the thing you're making can work. But in stories it doesn't
                have to be really perfect-- It doesn't have to be so every word is correct.
       [...]
       Amy:     What do you want to be when you grow up?
       Mouse:   I don't know
       Amy:     What do you NOT want to be when you grow up?
       Mouse:   I do NOT want to be... a mathematician!
       Amy:     How come?
       Mouse:   Cause I hate math?
       Amy:     How come you hate math?
       Mouse:   Cause... it's hard
       [...]
       Amy:     "How come math is hard?
       Mouse:   I don't know.... If you're a mathematician you have to figure out hard problems.
       Amy:     But isn't figuring out a hard problem fun?
       Mouse:   No. It takes forever.
       Amy:     Is writing programs like doing math problems?
       Mouse:   No.
       Amy:     How come?
       Mouse:   Cause, it's writing, not working out problems! And you don't have to use the plus and minus.... and the
                equals, and the divide.
       Amy:     Now wait a second! You were just using a greater-than in your program. That's a math symbol!
       Mouse:   That's not a plus, a minus, a times, a divide, or an equals!
       Amy:     <laughs>
       Mouse:   It doesn't count
       Amy:     It doesn't count, OK.
       Mouse:   Go talk to somebody else!
       Amy:     Oh... OK....
       Mouse:   I'm working on something interesting!
While Mouse sees math as something she has no talent for or interest in, she is proud of her writing ability. In this
environment, she sees programming as a form of writing. For at least this one child (and presumably some others), this
environment has made computer programming more appealing than it likely otherwise would be. But if differences in
achievement persist even in this environment, what is their source? Data analysis presented in this paper suggest that
educators wishing to increase girls' level of technical achievement should explore strategies for increasing girls' interest in
technical subjects. In both the BASIC programming environment Marcia Linn studied in the early to mid-1980s and in the
CSCL environment we designed and studied from the mid 1990s to the present, girls program equally well as boys when
they devote equal time to the activity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank everyone who has contributed to the MOOSE Crossing project over the years, especially
Mitchel Resnick, Elizabeth Edwards, Will Scott, Adam Skwersky, Trevor Stricker, and Steve Tamm. Current MOOSE
administrators include Alisa Bandlow and Tysen Perszyk. Jason Elliott and Jon Orwant provided help with Perl scripts.
Christian Jensen assisted with statistics. Special thanks to the kids, teachers, and parents who have participated in MOOSE
Crossing. Research in the Electronic Learning Communities Group (http://www.cc.gatech.edu/elc/) at Georgia Tech is
supported by IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Neometron, Ricoh, and the National Science Foundation.

REFERENCES
Abernathy, D. J. (2000). "How Men and Women Use the Internet Differently." Career Journal.
Bannert, M., & Arbinger, P., R. (1996) "Gender-Related Differences in Exposure to And Use of Computers: Results of a
       Survey of Secondary School Students" European Journal of Psychology of Education 11(3), 269-282.
Bruckman, A. (1997). MOOSE Crossing: Construction, Community, and Learning in a Networked Virtual World for Kids.
       Unpublished PhD, MIT.
Bruckman, A. (2000). "Situated Support for Learning: Storm's Weekend with Rachael." Journal of the Learning Sciences,
       9(3), 329-372.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 127

Bruckman, A., & Edwards, E. (1999). Should We Leverage Natural-Language Knowledge? Paper presented at the CHI,
       Pittsburgh, PA.
Bruckman, A., Edwards, E., Elliott, J., & Jensen, C. (2000, June). Uneven Achievement in a Constructionist Learning
       Environment. Paper presented at the International Conference on the Learning Sciences, Ann Arbor, MI.
Colley, A., M., Gale, M., T., & Harris, T., A. (1994) "Effects of Gender Role Identity and Experience on Computer Attitude
       Components." Journal of Educational Computing Research 10(2), 129-137.
Giacquinta, J. B., Bauer. J., A., & Levin, J., E. (1993). "Beyond Technology's Promise." Cambridge England: Cambridge
       University Press.
Kersteen, Z., A., Linn, M., C., Clancy, M., & Hardyck, C. (1988) "Previous Experience And The Learning of Computer
       Programming: The Computer Helps Those Who Help Themselves." Journal of Educational Computing Research
       4(3), 321-333.
Linn, M. C. (1985). "Fostering Equitable Consequences from Computer Learning Environments." Sex Roles, 13(3/4), 229-
       240.
Popper, K. (1971). The Open Society and Its Enemies (5th ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press.
