Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   138

 Emergent Leadership in Small Groups Using Computer-
                                     Mediated Communication
                                 Ryoko Yamaguchi, Nathan Bos, Judy Olson
                                                  University of Michigan
                                         {ryokoy, serp, jsolson} @umich.edu
ABSTRACT
When    small groups  meet   online, the communication   channel     they use  may affect the emergent    leadership  styles that
individuals attempt. We studied 66 three-person groups playing a social dilemma game and communicating via one of four
channels: face-to-face, videoconference, audio conference, or Internet chatroom. We found that the narrower the channel,
the less likely groups were to use relationship-focused leadership styles. We also found that for mixed-gender groups, lower
levels of relationship-focused leadership led to poorer group performance on the cooperation task. The more autocratic
task-focused leadership style was not inhibited by communication channel. Additional results are also given linking gender
composition to choice of leadership style. The statistical technique used in this research, Hierarchical Linear Modeling is
particularly useful for studying group work, and so is explained in some detail.

Keywords Computer-mediated communications, CMC, emergent leadership, collaborative learning, small group work,
trust, social dilemma
In the future, it may be common for virtual teams of learners to work together at a distance, and interact exclusively using
computer-mediated    communications     (CMC).    This will happen    increasingly as distance   education,  commuter-friendly
education, inter-school collaborations, and various other forms of e-learning are explored. Research on computer-supported
collaborative learning has identified effective models for using CMC in conjunction with face-to-face classroom interaction
(Koschmann, 1996; Hewitt, Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1997). However, new challenges may arise when groups rely on CMC
for all communications.
Small groups are very often asked to take on ambiguous tasks without any pre-assigned roles, with often no designated
group leader. This is true in both educational and workplace settings (Hackman, 1987). These groups are more effective
when leadership functions are performed by one or more members-- that is, when they experience emergent leadership
(Morris & Hackman, 1969; Borg, 1957; Bormann, 1990).
Emergent leadership can take several forms. For example, a single dominant individual can emerge to take over the group
process. Or, groups can take on a more democratic character, with equitable contribution of ideas and consensus-building
processes. Leadership is accomplished in either of these cases, but the styles are quite different. One often-used way of
characterizing emergent leadership styles is to contrast `task-focused' and `relationship-focused' leadership (Fiedler, 1967;
Stodgill and  Coons,  1957).  Briefly,  task-focused   leadership refers  to focusing exclusively   on the  task at hand,   while
relationship-related leadership refers   to improving   group  cohesion.   Task-focused   leadership   is often  associated  with
dominance   behavior,  such  as initiating  structure, while   relationship-focused   leadership is associated   with affiliative
behavior, such as democratic decision-making (Fiedler, 1967).
Previous research shows that students, even at a young age, may prefer a relationship-focused leadership style. French and
Stright (1991) studied fourth and sixth graders engaging in a group picture-rating task. Although one might expect such
young   students to  confuse dominance    with leadership,  in fact, the  behaviors  most associated   with  peer-  and teacher-
reported  leadership  were   soliciting  opinions from   others,  facilitating the task,  and   recording  outcomes.  Level   of
participation was only weakly correlated with leadership, showing that even young students can distinguish between what
we would call task-focused leadership (dominance) and relationship-focused leadership.
The two types of leadership are highly gendered (Eagly & Karau, 1991; Karau & Eagly, 1999; Kolb, 1999). Males tend to
emerge as task-focused leaders, while women tend more toward relationship-focused leadership (Eagly & Karau, 1991;
Karau & Eagly, 1999). To complicate matters, researchers have found that it may not gender per se, but gender group
composition that influences emergent leadership. Specifically, male-majority groups show more task-focused behaviors
while female-majority groups show more social and communal behaviors (Berdahl, 1996, 1998).
Regardless of the style, some form of emergent leadership may be necessary for small group effectiveness (Borg, 1957;
Hardy, 1971, 1972, 1976; Pryer, Flint, & Bass, 1962). One foundational study by Borg (1957) found that teams of Air
Force officer candidates, working on situational problems such as escaping from a simulated prison compound, performed
better when a leader emerge. Similarly, Bormann (1990) found that the emergence of leadership improved undergraduate
discussion groups.
In online settings, there may be an even greater need for emergent leadership. Jarvenpaa's 1998 study of international
project  teams documents   both difficulties  and success   stories, and  leadership  functions  were  strongly  associated  with
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  139

success. In this study, 29 teams of 4-6 undergraduates were grouped together in such a way that no two students were from
the same country. They were assigned to complete an online research project using only email and some chat sessions for
group coordination.  Based  on case studies     of  high and low-performing   groups, Jarvenpaa  identified leadership    as an
important characteristic of the successful groups. These leaders were sometimes single members and sometimes multiple
members, but they tended to share these characteristics: leaders took initiative early on in the task, leaders maintained a
positive outlook, and group members could count on receiving timely and predictable responses to communications from
group leaders. The less-successful groups, in contrast, had no leadership or negative (complaining) leadership, lack of
individual initiative, and unpredictable communications between members. Email records from these less-successful efforts
portray directionless groups where email questions go unanswered, important process questions are never addressed, and
other leadership functions are unfulfilled.
Given the considerable challenges associated with managing group work online, research is needed on how emergent
leadership functions tend to occur in different telecommunications conditions. Beyond purely descriptive work, research is
needed on what management strategies or teaching interventions are likely to be effective in virtual teams. The study
reported here compares emergent leadership in four communication conditions, differentiates between relationship-focused
and task-focused leadership styles, and identifies characteristics that may lead to success in these new settings.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Our data supports examination of these three questions:
Research Question 1: How do communication media influence emergent leadership?
Research Question 2: How does group gender composition influence emergent leadership?
Research Questions 3: How does emergent leadership influence cooperation in group work?

METHODS
Experimental task
Sixty-six groups of three volunteers played an online social dilemma game called `Daytrader'. These groups were allowed
to discuss the ongoing game periodically using one of four communication conditions: face-to-face meeting, a high-quality
videoconference, a standard phone conference, and an Internet chatroom.
The Daytrader game is a social dilemma devised for this research, adapted from previous research by Rocco (1998). Social
dilemmas are useful for studying cooperation and trust-building in groups. In Daytrader, participants must decide every
round how to divide a 30 token investment between individual and group investment. Giving to the group investment pays
a higher overall rate (3x), but entails some risk, because it is dependent on the actions of others. The proceeds of the group
investment are divided equally among participants, so that individuals who contribute to the group risk being exploited by
those who contribute little or nothing. The alternative to investing with the group is investing as an individual, which pays a
guaranteed lower rate (2x) that is not dependent on others. Maximum cooperation (and maximum payoff) are achieved
when all three participants contribute all of their funds to the group. Groups differ on whether, and how quickly they are
able to reach the maximum cooperation level. The differences in group payoff are therefore a good measure of cooperation,
and correlate highly with post-test measures of trust in group members.
As reported  in  a previous paper (Bos,     Gergle, Olson, &  Olson,  2001), the communication   media  does  affect   groups'
cooperation and self-reported trust. Face-to-face groups were the most cooperative, followed by video, audio, and text chat.
The three technology mediated conditions all showed slower-developing trust and more frequent opportunistic betrayals
among group members.
As part of   the experimental post-test, participants    reported on their own emergent   leadership behavior      during group
discussions. This data provides a context for studying how emergent leadership arises across the four communications
conditions, and examining whether leadership style had an effect on group performance.

Participants
Participants were 197 people recruited through a paid subject list at a large university in the Midwest. There were 49%
female participants and the mean age was 23.
Group Gender Composition
Participants were  randomly  assigned to    the following  gender  group   composition: female only  (11%),  majority     female
(39%), male only (15%), and majority male (35%).
Group Condition
Groups were randomly assigned to one of the following communication mediums: face-to-face (24%), video conferencing
(26%), audio conferencing (26%), and chat (24%).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                          page 140

Measures
The leadership    scales,    task and    relationship-focused      leadership,     were adapted    from    Stogdill's Leadership   Behavior
Descriptor Questionnaire (Stogdill, 1948, 1969; Stogdill & Coons, 1957). One scale measured task-focused leadership (5-
item scale, alpha=.84) with items such as "I took charge of what the group should do during the game" and "I gave
directions  to  the other   players    on how      we should     play    the game."   Relationship-focused    leadership  items focused  on
individuals'    actions promoting      group      cohesion   (4-item     scale, alpha=.87) with   items  including    "In the discussions I
suggested how we could all work together" and "I made sure that everyone in my group was listening to one another."
These items     measured    subjects'   self-perceptions      of leadership     behaviors. Self-perceptions   are used    because they  best
measure the intentions of the actors, rather than observable behaviors or external impressions. Future analysis of this data
will examine the degree to which these intentions resulted in observable leadership behaviors.
Cooperation is measured by looking at the total group payoff in the Daytrader game, after discarding the first five rounds
before any communication occurred. The more quickly and consistently groups cooperated in the game, the higher the total
group payoffs. This measure was used in other research on this data, and correlates highly with self-reports of trust within
the group.

Analysis
Because the data for this study has multiple levels (student and group level), hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) is used to
answer how emergent leadership is associated with communication media, gender group composition, and cooperation.
HLM is a statistical (maximum likelihood) procedure that was developed by Bryk and Raudenbush (1992) to address the
unit of analysis problem in multi-level analysis. HLM is a series of regression-like equations that takes into account the
interdependence, or nestedness, of the data (Bryk & Raudenbush, 1992; Pollack, 1998).
HLM   is  a good    statistical technique    for    analyzing    small    group  data because    this data is `nested'--that  is, data from
individual participants cannot be considered independent of all others, but rather are partly dependent on their small groups.
One other way that such group data is sometimes handled is by using only group averages, but this discards much useful
information. HLM makes it possible to analyze all the data at hand.

RESULTS
Task-focused Leadership
There were no significant differences in task-focused leadership across the communication mediums. In gender group
composition, female-only groups had lower levels of task-focused leadership, as compared to male-only groups ( =-0.696,
t = -3.713, p<.001).

Effects of Task-focused Leadership on Cooperation
While task-focused leadership was not directly related to cooperation, it improved cooperation in certain communication
mediums. Specifically, in the audio condition, task-focused leadership positively influenced cooperation ( =34.015, t =
2.058, p<.05) (See Figure 1).
Figure 1: Task-Focused Leadership in the Audio Condition
   2243.3
                                                                               AUDIO = 0.000000
   2231.9                                                                      AUDIO = 1.000000

   2220.6

   2209.2

   2197.8
P
A  2186.4
Y
   2175.1

   2163.7

   2152.3

   2141.0

   2129.6

           2.75       3.45       4.15        4.85       5.55        6.25

                                  TLEAD

Relationship-focused Leadership
There were      significant  differences  in      relationship-focused     leadership across    communication   media     and gender   group
composition. In communication mediums, the chat condition had the lowest levels of relationship-focused leadership ( =-
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                          page 141

0.530, t =-2.715,   p<.01).   The       value for   relationship-focused     leadership  was   -.453   (t =  -2.567,  p<.05)   in the audio
condition,  and  -.344  (t  = -1.924,   p<.10)  in   the video    condition.    Hence, perceptions     of relationship-focused    leadership
became progressively lower as the communication medium went from fuller to narrower.
In group gender composition, female-majority groups had lower relationship-focused leadership ( = -.42, t= -2.10, p<.05),
and were even lower in female-only groups ( = -.51, t= -1.91, p<.10).

Effects of Relationship-focused Leadership on Cooperation
While  relationship-focused    leadership    was    not directly  related    to cooperation,   it had  significant effects  in cooperation
depending on the gender group composition and the communication medium. Specifically, in female-majority groups,
relationship-focused leadership was positively related to cooperation ( = 91.548, t = 2.733, p<.05). In male-majority
groups, relationship-focused leadership was also positively related to cooperation ( =67.514, t = 1.784, p<.10).
In the communication medium, relationship-focused leadership negatively influenced cooperation in the chat condition (
=-131.909, t = -3.152, p<.01) (See Figure 2).

Figure 2: Relationship-focused Leadership in the Chat Condition as compared to other conditions
   2264.3
                                                                                  CHAT = 0.000000
   2144.7                                                                         CHAT = 1.000000

   2025.2

   1905.6

   1786.1
P
A  1666.5
Y
   1547.0

   1427.4

   1307.9

   1188.3

   1068.8

           4.20        4.72        5.24        5.76        6.28        6.80

                                   RLEAD

DISCUSSION
How does communication medium influence emergent leadership?
Task-focused    leadership   did not    change  much     across   the different   communications       conditions.  Apparently,   narrowed
communication channels did not hinder this kind of emergent leadership. Relationship-focused leadership was affected by
media, however.     Levels    of relationship-focused      leadership  were     progressively     lower   as the  communication     channel
narrowed from face-to-face to video, to audio, and to on-line chat. As was previously found with trust, (Bos, et. al. 2001), it
seems  that this  leadership   style    is inhibited  by mediated     channels.   Why   might     this be?   It could be that  participants
attempted   relationship-focused   strategies   but     found   them  to    be  less effective in   mediated    conditions,  and   therefore
abandoned them early in the task. Or, it could be that because of the feeling of social distance afforded by this technology
(Siegel, Dubrovsky, Kiesler, and McGuire, 1986) participants did not even attempt to build up a sense of group cohesion. In
either case, this presents an interesting challenge for computer-supported group work settings where instructors would like
to foster relationship focused leadership skills.

How does group gender composition influence emergent leadership?
Female-only groups had lower levels of both task-focused and relationship-focused leadership, and female-majority groups
also had lower levels of relationship-focused leadership. The first part of this finding (lower task-focused leadership) is
consistent with past research on gender differences in emergent leadership. Female-majority groups usually report less task-
focused leadership than male-majority groups (Karau & Eagly, 1999; Kolb, 1999). But the second part of this finding, that
female-majority and all-female groups showed lower relationship-focused leadership, is unexpected and harder to interpret
within our theoretical framework. Female-majority groups did not have lower overall cooperation levels, so if there was
less leadership  it did greatly   inhibit   overall   team performance.       Perhaps  the combination       of a distancing media    and a
competitive task dissuaded female-majority groups from using what would have been their preferred leadership styles.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  142

This finding is especially interesting in light of research which shows that female students are less inhibited in computer-
mediated conversations and participate on a more equal footing males (Hsi & Hoadley, 1997). Could it be that the same
technology which encourages individual female students to speak up also tends to inhibit female-majority groups from
forming strong group relationships?
There is one other possible interpretation. Perhaps women only rated their relationship-focused strategies as lower because
the measures used were self-reports, and women have a tendency to under-rate themselves in leadership (Owen, 1986).
Analyses of the conversation transcripts currently underway should help decide which of the above interpretations is more
accurate.

How does emergent leadership influence cooperation in group work?
Was emergent leadership necessary for effective small group interaction in these experiments? In the Daytrader game, there
were no overall effects on cooperation success from either leadership style. But there were some interactions with media
and gender composition, indicating that emergent leadership did affect success for some types of small groups.
Relationship-focused   leadership   seemed   to benefit both  sets  of  the mixed-gender    groups, female-majority     and  male
majority, but failed to have significant impact in the female-only or male-only groups. This could mean that when groups
are mixed-gender, there is a greater need for these groups to create and maintain positive group relationships, and greater
harm to cooperation if there is no relationship-focused leadership.
Looking at communication conditions, we found that relationship-focused leadership seemed to harm the performance in
one media channel, the chat condition. We had already reported that chat led to less relationship-focused leadership; this
new  finding  goes   even  further, saying that  when  relationship-focused  strategies  were attempted    in chat   they actually
backfired, resulting in slightly worse cooperation. There is one alternate explanation, which is that relationship-focused
strategies were only attempted after other attempts to cooperate had already failed, and thus were only used when group
cooperation was already well below average. Obviously the implications of these two interpretations are very different--
one  argues   that relationship-focused   leadership  should not   even be   attempted  via  text  chat, while the   other is not
prescriptive. The   first interpretation seems  less  consistent with  other research,  which  has  found   relationship-focused
leadership to be beneficial or, at worst, a neutral influence. It is also inconsistent with previous research on chat (Zheng,
Bos, Olson and Olson, 2001) which shows that trust can be built via chat communication. The issue of when chat groups
attempted relationship-building (before or after cooperation had gone sour) may be settled by further discourse analysis of
the current data.
As for task-focused leadership, it was significantly related to cooperation only in the audio condition. Specifically, task-
focused   leadership  improved  cooperation   in  the  audio condition. This   may  indicate  that because    audio  conferencing
involves real-time interactions without visual cues, task-focused leadership is critical to the success of these groups.

CONCLUSION
The most important finding of this research is that narrower computer-mediated channels seem to inhibit relationship-
focused   leadership. Since  these  authors,  and   we suspect   most  educators, prefer relationship-focused     leadership  as a
desirable strategy for learning groups, this finding presents a pedagogical challenge. We do not, however, consider that this
challenge  is insurmountable.   There    are many    interventions we   can  imagine that   might  help   virtual teams   develop
relationship-focused   self-management     techniques,  including  team-building   exercises, direct     instruction on   effective
leadership. It may also be a good idea for newly-formed groups to get to know each other use a richer communication
channels such as videoconferencing for the purpose of relationship-building. Even chatrooms might be useful for this if
meeting time is explicitly set aside for socialization. Pre-task chatroom meetings were found to improve trust in Zheng, et
al. 2001. Perhaps    there are similar,  relatively simple interventions  that can  overcome   the  leadership-style   tendencies
described in this paper. Future research should focus both on clarifying why communication channels may affect emergent
leadership, and also help identify effective strategies for promoting positive leadership.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by National Science Foundation grant IIS 9977923 to Judy and Gary Olson
REFERENCES
Berdahl, J. L. (1996). Gender and leadership in work groups: Six alternative models. Leadership Quarterly: Special Issue:
          Leadership and diversity: I., 7(1), 21-40.
Berdahl, J. L. (1998). The dynamics of composition and socialization in small groups: Insights gained from developing a
          computational model. Composition: Research on managing groups and teams, 1, 209-227.
Borg, W. R. (1957). The behavior of emergent and designated leaders in situational tasks. Sociometry, 20(2), 95-104.
Bormann, E. G. (1990). Small Group Communication: Theory and Practice ( Third ed.). New York: Harper and Row.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 143

Bos, N.D., Gergle, D., Olson, J.S., & Olson, G.M. (2001) Trust without touch: video is (almost) as good as being there.
         Proceedings of CHI 2001. New York: ACM. [on-line] http://intel.si.umich.edu/crew/technical_reports.htm
Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and Data Analysis Methods. Newbury
         Park: Sage Publications.
Eagly, A. H., & Karau, S. J. (1991). Gender and the emergence of leaders: A meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and
         Social Psychology, 60(5), 685-710.
Fiedler, F. E. (1967). A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill.
French, D. C., & Stright, A. L. (1991). Emergent leadership in children's small groups. Small Group Research, 22(2), 187-
         199.
Hackman, J.R. (1987). The design of work teams. In J. W. Lorsch (Ed.), Handbook of Organizational Behavior (pp. 315-
         341). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall).
Hardy, R. C. (1971). Effect of leadership style on the performance of small classroom groups: A test of the contingency
         model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 19(3), 367-374.
Hardy, R. C. (1972). A developmental study of relationships between birth order and leadership style for two distinctly
         different American groups. Journal of Social Psychology, 87(1), 147-148.
Hardy, R. C. (1976). A test of the poor leader-member relation cells of the contingency model on elementary school
         children. Child Development, 46(4), 958-964.
Hewitt, J. (1997). Beyond threaded discourse. Paper presented at WebNet 97. [on-line] http://csile.oise.ca.edu
Hsi, S. & Hoadley, C. (1997). Productive discussion in science: gender equity through electronic discourse. Journal of
         Science Education and Technology 6 (1), 23-36.
Jarvenpaa, S.L., Leidner, D.E. (1998). Communication and trust in global virtual teams. Journal of Computer-Mediated
         Communications 3 (4). [on-line] http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue4/jarvenpaa.html
Karau, S. J., & Eagly, A. H. (1999). Invited Reaction: Gender, social roles, and the emergence of leaders. Human Resource
         Development Quarterly, 10(4), 321-327.
Kolb, J. A. (1992). Leadership of creative teams. Journal of Creative Behavior, 26(1), 1-9.
Kolb, J. A.   (1999). The effect  of gender role, attitude toward  leadership  and  self-confidence on  leader   emergence:
         Implications for leadership development. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 10(4), 305-320.
Koschmann, T (1996) CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Morris, C. G., & Hackman, J. R. (1969). Behavioral Correlates of Perceived Leadership. Journal of Personality and Social
         Psychology, 13(4), 350-361.
Owen, W. F. (1986). Rhetorical themes of emergent female leaders. Small Group Behavior, 17(4), 375-486.
Pollack, B. N. (1998). Hierarchical linear modeling and the "unit of analysis" problem: A solution for analyzing responses
         of intact group members. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 2(4), 299-312.
Pryer, M. W., Flint, A. W., & Bass, B. M. (1962). Group effectiveness and consistency of leadership. Sociometry, 25(4),
         391-397.Rocco,   E. Trust breaks down  in   electronic contexts but can be repaired   by some  initial face-to-face
         contact, Conference proceedings on human factors in computing systems, 1998, pp496-502.
Rothaus, P., Davis, R. T., & Banker, C. A. (1969). Participants in adolescent autonomous groups. Journal of Genetic
         Psychology, 114(1), 135-142.
Siegel, J., Dubrovsky, V., Kiesler, S., & McGuire, T. (1986). Group processes in computer-mediated communication.
         Organizational behavior and human decision processes 37, 157-187.
Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the literature. Journal of Psychology, 25,
         35-71.
Stogdill, R. M., & Coons, A. E. (Eds.). (1957). Leader Behavior: Its Description and Measurement. Columbus, OH: Ohio
         State University, Bureau of Business Research.
Stogdill, R. M. (1969). Validity of leader behavior descriptions. Personnel Psychology, 22(2), 153-158.
Webb, N. M., Nemer, K. M., Chizhik, A. W., & Sugrue, B. (1998). Equity issues in collaborative group assessment: Group
composition and performance. American Educational Research Journal, 35(4), 607-651.
