Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page 144

   Golem, from Prague to Cyberspace: The Use of CSCL in
                            Cultural Education for Diasporas
                                          Zvi Bekerman, Gabriel Horenczyk
                 Melton Center, School of Education, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
                                       mszviman@mscc.huji.ac.il; gabriel@vms.huji.ac.il

ABSTRACT
In this paper we present, and provide the theoretical basis of, a computer supported and mediated educational research
project   which encourages    cultural production and sustainability.   We    first describe  the CD-Golem    project  which   was
developed in light of the perceived needs of a Diaspora community's attempts to impart its youth with a sense of belonging
and continuity. Next, we characterize Cultural Education and discuss the theoretical rationale of our approach in the context
of current   theories of identity and  cultural  construction,  multicultural education   and  computer-supported    collaborative
learning. We conclude by briefly reviewing and critically evaluating some of the lessons we have learned in our first years
of activity.

Keywords:
Computer-Supported     Collaborative   Learning,  Multicultural  Education,   Cultural   Education,   Diaspora,   Technology    and
education, Ethnic Identity, Cultural Identity, Jewish Education.

INTRODUCTION
Given the enthusiastic use of computers to confront a variety of cognitive and pedagogical challenges in education (CTGV,
1993; Jonassen, 1994) we asked ourselves how these technologies could be employed in order to help minority cultural
groups develop and sustain a sense of pride in their cultural heritage.
In this paper   we   describe and theorize  about a computer    supported  and      mediated  educational  research  project which
encourages cultural production and sustainability. We begin with a brief description of the CD-Golem project (Cultural
Dimension Golem; http://cdgolem.huji.ac.il) that was developed in light of the perceived needs of a Diaspora community's
attempts to impart its youth with a sense of belonging and continuity under less than optimal conditions. Next we discuss
the theoretical rationale of our approach in the context of current theories of identity and cultural construction, multicultural
education and computer-supported collaborative learning. We conclude by briefly reviewing some of the lessons we have
learned in our first years of activity, and presenting some preliminary impressions gained from our ongoing monitoring and
critical evaluation.

THE CD-GOLEM PROJECT
In an attempt to usher Cultural education into the world of computer-based learning, the CD-Golem was developed as an
innovative educational and recreational website which serves Jewish schools worldwide. A combination of practical and
theoretical concerns shaped our goals in designing the site. Practically speaking, we wanted to create activities in which
children and youth would enjoy participating. We were confronted with the need to merge what we perceived to be the
possible interests of Jewish schools and their students with our own ideas of educational efficacy in the realm of culture and
identity. Theoretically,  we  wanted   to create activities which   would offer     opportunities for ongoing    communication  on
issues of culture and identity, along the lines of constructivist approaches grounded in Piagetian perspectives on reflective
abstraction  (Piaget, 1926)   and Vygotskyan     (Vygotsky,  1978)  understandings    of  thought  as  the  outcome  of   dialogical
activity.
The CD-Golem site offers participants, 8-15 years of age, a variety of activities divided into four sections: "World of
Writing", "Roots and Traditions"," World of Communities" and "Golem Challenges You". The "World of Writing" offers
participants a wide range of opportunities to share with others their ideas related primarily to culture and identity. For
example,   they can   engage  in  journalism through writing    for the "Golem      Gazette", author  their own   stories based on
suggested themes (or on themes raised by the participants themselves) and offer interpretations of pictures related to a
variety of socio-political issues. In the section on "Roots and Traditions", the participants are given the opportunity to build
their own    genealogical tree,  by interviewing  parents   and gathering stories    from relatives,  and   also to confront   some
dilemmas related to their communities' historical and religious traditions. The "World of Communities" allows participants
to choose their own way to introduce themselves, their families, and their communities to the other members of the Golem
worldwide community. Finally, "Golem Challenges You" is a section in which participants are afforded the opportunity to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  145

take part in dramatized   court cases, stimulating collaboration   and   argumentation   towards cultural and  ethical problem
solving.
Participants in CD-Golem connect with one another through the Golem Communication Center which links students to
bulletin boards, moderated discussion and chat groups, their personal e-mail, and `ICQ-like' options. The site is facilitated
and  mediated by  the   Golem,  a  mythical  polyglot cyber-persona,   who  functions  as an `educational  agent  or manager',
navigating, supporting, motivating and challenging the participants throughout the program to think through and better
elaborate their views regarding the ethical and value-laden issues raised in the diverse activities. The Golem can be thought
of as one of the `partners' in the Vygotskyan "Zone of Proximal Development" (Cole, 1996; Wertsch, 1985), encouraging
and assisting participants in their evolving performance.
CD-Golem functions on a rather modest software of the type used by academic institutions for long-distance learning (i.e.
WebCT) and clearly does not compete with the commercial sites developed for children activities and play. The site is
loosely structured and its not presented as a curricular program. CD-Golem is suggested for use in Jewish schools and other
informal educational settings, and it is only through these institutions that participants can join. The hope is that the site will
encourage  curricular  integration by  getting teachers involved   in  a variety of disciplines  to collaborate in developing,
together with the children, different aspects of an activity (i.e. teachers of history, social studies and Judaic studies may
choose to collaborate on a global community activity). It is expected that peer interaction will further the co-construction of
knowledge, while affording rewards that are intrinsic to the activity, thereby avoiding the problems of extrinsic rewards that
dominate school activity. For example, participants have been encouraged to respond individually and cooperatively to
current  socio-political dilemmas   such  as the destruction of    the Buddha    statues  by the Taliban   or the  anti-Semitic
propaganda of Holocaust denial websites. Lastly, we hope for teachers in general and Jewish areas of study to recognize the
potential of using a system which, in addition to its contents, offers intrinsic textual, computational, and linguistic literacy
for students. The lingua franca of the system is English, although children can write in any language using Latin characters,
and recently a Hebrew option has been also added.
In the three years of CD-Golem's operation approximately fifty schools in five continents and over 15 countries have
steadily or periodically participated in the project. At this point there are 25 schools enrolled and participating at different
levels of involvement.

CULTURAL EDUCATION
The CD-Golem project was envisioned as a cooperative community-university project: The community of Jews in Israel
and the Diaspora, and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. CD-Golem was shaped for the benefit of both parties: the
educational web environment was expected to offer valuable educational activities relevant to the realities of school life,
and at the same time to provide rich data for educational research. All in all we wanted to attempt to bridge the gap between
the practice of Cultural Education, theoretical advancements in the field of cultural and identity development, and the new
educational technologies.
By Cultural Education (CE) we mean the educational efforts invested by minority groups who want to sustain what they
perceive to be their socio-historical heritage [when confronted with the globalizing assimilatory power of an hegemonic
West  (Castells,  1997;  Featherstone, 1995).  Ethnic,  religious, cultural or political minorities are not   necessarily to be
understood only in terms of relative numbers within a nation-state. Thus in Israel, where Jews are a numerical majority,
current western globalizing trends can create a sense of minority for some Jewish groups present (Bekerman & Silverman,
1999; Kimmerling, 1993; Smooha, 1998).
Both concepts -- "Culture" and "Education" -- have histories, which for the most part have been forgotten. The terms have
become independent, reified nouns in contrast to their processual, developmental, historicized meanings (Elias, 1998; Watt,
1997; Williams, 1961). This process of reification and fixation is part of the problem we are seeking to ameliorate. We find
that the restoration of the developmental process embodied in these historically re-contextualized concepts constitutes a
partial solution towards these same problems, as well as an educational model (Bekerman, in press-a).
Traditionally the basic humanities curriculum puts a great emphasis on classical philosophical inquiry, mostly from an
idealistic perspective concerned with the nature of reality and problems of virtue in political educational contexts. It also
envisions traditional textual literacy as the heart of cultural (in our case Jewish) production and maintenance. Finally,
humanities   curricula suggest  a  strong connection   between traditional   views  of `universal'  humanism    and  traditional
particularistic cultural worldviews. Textual learning in these settings has been presented in a dislocated and mostly de-
historicized way, unsuccessfully engaging learners in interpretative practices that might make these texts relevant to their
present contexts.
Cultural Education is geared to cultivate in members of culturally, economically, or politically oppressed groups a critical
consciousness (McLaren, 1997; Nichols & Brown, 1996) of their situation as the foundation of their libratory praxis while
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page  146

recognizing    that their greatest  enemy   is the fatalistic belief  in the inevitability and   necessity  of existing beliefs  and
structures.
The classic humanities curriculum implicitly (and partially explicitly) assumes certain modern understandings of concepts
such as culture, identity, and education, which are associated with individual, cognitive, and autonomous activities. In the
last decades, theoretical developments within the `new' humanities and social sciences have led to a reexamination of
cultural production and maintenance and the related issues of identity development, and educational theory and strategies
(Giddens, 1991; Harre & Gillett, 1994; Holzman, 1997).
Thus our understanding of culture, identity and education (and related concepts such as language, power and memory) has
undergone a shift from de-contextualized, ideal models to historicized, dialogically produced and transformed ones. Our
focus has   therefore    shifted from   the individual   to the   social arena   and  from the   intra-psychological   to the  inter-
psychological (Schwandt, 1998). The theoretical relocation into the social interactional sphere where historically situated
participants   calibrate  their positions according   to complex    socio-cultural  relations, has  the potential to  promote  a re-
thinking of educational aims and strategies (Bekerman, in press-b).
It is the curricular organization towards these aims and its resulting practices, which we call Cultural Education (CE). CE is
geared towards the joint production of agents aware of historical processes, the interdependence of social phenomena, and
the participation of a multiplicity of powers and interests in the shaping of present meanings. This awareness should allow
agents to devise the strategies necessary for change (if change is indeed their goal), and to consider the feasibility of their
implementation in the multiple arenas in which interested powers struggle for domination (educational institutions, media
channels, political arenas, etc.). These are not uniquely Jewish educational challenges. They are salient for a multitude of
other cultural groups which have suffered from western social, cultural, political, and or economic colonizing tendencies in
the modern era.
CD-Golem reflects this educational approach in its activities which are constructed under the premise that culture has little
to do with the habits we train people to adopt and has everything to do with the environments we build for people to inhabit
(Varenne & McDermott, 1998). Culture and identity are approached as contexts. Not the ones into which one is placed, but
context as   a behavioral   arena   of which   one is part. In  short CD-Golem      proposes   that social interaction continuously
produces culture and identity. CD-Golem approaches education as a social enterprise in which all individuals have an
opportunity to contribute and to which all feel a responsibility (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998).

CULTURAL EDUCATION, MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION AND CSCL
Cultural Education departs from multicultural education in that it is particularistically bounded and aligns with it in that it
wishes to strengthen tolerance and recognition towards multiple cultural forms enabling them to interact on equal bases in
the public arena. Like multicultural approaches, Cultural Education is supportive of introducing to educational practice
concepts related to content integration, knowledge construction and prejudice reduction (Banks, 1995).
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) suits our aims to assist youth from a minority culture Diaspora to
both achieve cultural sustainability and strengthen multicultural sensitivities. Our approach shares with CSCL constructivist
perspectives, which emphasize an understanding of problem-based apprenticeship, situatedness, and distributive cognition
(Duffy & Cunningham, 1996). The use of computers and the location of the project in the World Wide Web made it
possible to render choices available for the content and directions of learning, to support collaborative learning between
student peers and teachers, and to offer activities which would allow for different patterns in the organization of learning as
well as afford widely dispersed Diaspora groups to sustain consistent synchronic and a-synchronic communication. The
technology implemented promotes, by its mere existence, the boundedness of what was until now for the most part an
"imagined    community"    (Anderson,     1991). We   would    like  to  suggest that   CD-Golem     is doing  CSCCE    (Computer-
Supported Collaborative Cultural Education).

LESSONS LEARNED
The main goal of CD-Golem is to search for new and creative ways to develop a sense of belonging within an evolving
cultural sphere while both sustaining a polisemic and multivalent perspective and promoting multicultural understanding
and awareness (Ridley, Mendoza, & Kanitz, 1994).
When considering that from the start our aim was to implement the project not in a particular school or network of schools
in a city but on a variety of educational institutions around the world it will surprise no one if we state that developing the
project has been both challenging and frustrating. We had assumed that private schools would be technologically well-
equipped,   that the  teachers   of a  Diaspora  nation,  with  a powerful   rhetorical  tradition  of  unity, would   welcome   the
opportunity to easily connect and sustain communication, and that private and public benefactors would readily support the
introduction of new technologies in an educational setting they identified as an ideological imperative for the further
evolution   of their community.     Soon  we   discovered   these assumptions    to  be unrealistically  optimistic. Although  most
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 147

schools that joined the program had computer equipment, the equipment was mostly used to introduce students to computer
literacy and was rarely integrated into other curricular areas. When integrated, computers played a role in high-status
curricular tracks (mathematics, language, business), while Jewish educational areas, traditionally perceived as secondary in
terms of  expected academic achievements,  were segregated from the general studies    and         particularly from computer
support.
One of our first surprises came from the types of teachers who expressed an interest in participating in the project. They can
be classified into three categories. In Israel and some non-English speaking Diaspora communities, the first to join were
those teaching English as a second language. For them, CD-Golem became an opportunity to teach the language, not in the
abstraction of a detached class, but in a context in which its use served real communicational purposes (i.e. pen pal
correspondence or communicating with the Golem character). It became a welcomed opportunity to integrate cherished
cultural activities into their language discipline without impeding ??? upon language development. The second category
included computer lab teachers who welcomed the Golem as a project which offered the opportunity to add some substance
to the rather bland technical learning they usually conducted in their computer literacy lessons. Last came the few Jewish
educators who, aside from their work in a disciplinary area, were young computer `freaks'. Many of these teachers proved
to be short-term participants who found it difficult, in spite of their early enthusiasm, to relate to the educational issues
raised and the educational approaches and learning perspectives offered by CD-Golem.
It was clear from the start that reaching what we had thought to be our first target, Jewish educators at large, would be no
easy task. It soon became apparent from those who did join, that they had little familiarity with either the technologies or
the theoretical approaches which supported the project. The on-line support system we had build for them soon proved to
be of no help. It was clear that teachers unfamiliar with the technology could not and would not use that same tool to
overcome their handicap. Ultimately we `regressed' to the supposedly obsolete long distance telephone calls and, wherever
possible, on-site visits became the central tools of training and support. Overcoming this obstacle was not enough. The
learning approach and the theoretical perspectives regarding the constructive and dialogical aspects of culture and identity,
on which CD-Golem is grounded, proved difficult to grasp for our school partners. In many instances we had reports of
teachers downloading activities from the site to use them, transformed into hard copies, in regular classes, derailing our
efforts to encourage synchronic or a-synchronic communicational activity. For the most part, teachers used CD-Golem in
class in ways which did not encourage collaborative work. They preferred activities which could be done individually, i.e.
writing to Golem, answering a quiz.
Most of the problems mentioned above have been well documented in recent research (CTGV, 1996; Harris, 1995; Siegel,
1995; Witmer, 1998). We are forced to recognize that in spite of the two decades or more since the introduction of
technologies into school life, the new technologies are still difficult to adapt to traditional educational paradigms. The
situation is more acute in `low status' educational fields such as, in our case, Jewish education.
We have encountered other challenges to our project. Some are ideological and others of a more technical nature. Though
the CD-Golem is offered as a tool which can potentially strengthen ties between the Jewish community worldwide, present
ideological perspectives, which emphasize the centrality of Israel for the Jewish world (Cohen, 1991) seem to prevent
teachers from experimenting with the Golem system to create ties between schools within a Diaspora community or among
Diaspora communities themselves (for example, to create a local network among the schools presently participating in
Mexico City, or to attempt communication between schools in England and Argentina).
Global Jewish dispersion also brings about serious scheduling problems which schools find difficult to overcome. Indeed,
communicating between Los Angeles and Israel could mean having children in Los Angeles working at eight o'clock in the
morning and those in Israel at six o'clock in the afternoon -- a time when schools are regularly closed. True, the technology
is not school dependent and it could be possible to create the connection between students working from home. However,
this would depend upon participating students owning relevant equipment, and a coordinated school effort to generate
student commitment to the program outside of school hours. At present we are struggling to find creative solutions to these
problems.
The students, for their part, seem to participate in activities mostly when encouraged to do so by their teachers. There has
been little participation by students outside of school activity in the privacy of their homes though they each hold a personal
password which would allow them to access the system from anywhere. Reviewing the activity logs, it becomes apparent
that the participants prefer activities which directly relate to their own experiences rather than engaging in activities dealing
with issues of a social or political nature. Thus an activity which called upon students to choose an animal they would enjoy
becoming for a day and to render an explanation for their choice, produced a rather large amount of responses (a total of 70
messages, over a month), while discussion activities around issues such us `Should the Israeli Defense Forces retreat from
Lebanon?' or `Can the Taliban be justified for destroying the Buddha statues?' attracted very little participation (ten to
fifteen responses each). The animal activity included a second stage in which students were asked to suggest which animal
would better represent the Jewish people; this stage of the activity also produced few responses.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  148

CD-Golem offers an opportunity to contact other children around the world. Corresponding with participants through
personalized e-mail accounts offered by the system is one way of achieving this aim. This correspondence reinforces the
ideological discourse of Jewish education that cherishes the strengthening of a worldwide Jewish community. Yet pen pal
activities have not been easy to develop. They have primarily succeeded on the `school in Diaspora' to `school in Israel'
track. As of yet, no contacts between different schools in Diaspora or between schools in Israel have developed. The
contacts are usually initiated by teachers who were personally interested in encouraging the students and asked us to
establish the necessary connections to support the correspondence. Once the connections were established, they produced a
rather large amount of e-mail exchanges (over 100 and over 70 in two separate occasions during the span of three months of
activity). Still, the contents of the exchange between students were limited to short biographical statements with little
follow-up activity.
One of the dilemma activities offered dealt with the need to decide who, out of two critically ill, hospitalized patients who
are in urgent need of a very rare blood type transfusion will receive the only blood portion which Adam can offer. One
belongs to Adam's community, whereas the other is a stranger. Participants in this activity were happy to express their
views and react to Golem's messages challenging their statements (over forty messages were exchanged with the students
in one of the participating classes). However, students have yet to engage in research to further substantiate their positions,
even though links to knowledge-enriching sites are made available.
There was a fair amount of participation in activities related to festivals and traditions (six schools participated on different
occasions), and the information submitted was relatively richer in content than other activity responses, due to the overlap
between the activity's content and the contents taught in regular classroom sessions.
Apparently the activities undertaken by teachers and students mostly reflect the present, traditional assumptions of what
constitutes Jewish education. Festival-related work and networking with Israeli Jewish youth are teacher-preferred activities
because they fall within the boundaries of traditional perceptions of Jewish education. Political and social issues, on the
other hand, seem less attractive since they do not fit traditional conceptions of what constitutes the purview of Jewish
educators. Students choose to become involved mostly with issues which engage them on a personal, experiential level, but
even then  only within   the limits  of school activities. The students' limited   type of  involvement also   reflects  current
compartmentalizing conceptions of Jewish education. Readily engaging in festival and root-type activities, students will
make no apparent effort to engage in socio-political issues which might not be perceived as belonging to the field of Jewish
study, nor will they invest in widening their present scope of knowledge by voluntarily accessing outside resources.
In spite of the rather gloomy picture, we remain enthusiastic. In the last three years, both the amount of participants and the
levels of participation have steadily grown. From a modest start with six schools and one hundred and fifty participants, we
are now working with twenty-five schools and almost one thousand registered members.
We have learned much in the few years of the project's operation, and much more has yet to be understood for CD-Golem
to achieve its aim. It becomes more and more apparent that for technology to foster collaborative learning and cross-
disciplinary critical exploration,  we  may have   to help  more  actively educators    and students rethink   their paradigms
regarding relevant educational contents and applications, in light of communal needs and the expanding temporal and
spatial boundaries of Cultural Education perspectives, while also looking for new ways to assess student and teachers
performance (Means & Olson, 1994). New technologies may not, all by themselves, have the power to help minorities
overcome the basic cultural and educational premises which control them. When uncritically used, they might even help the
process of social reproduction. For new technologies to become liberating educational tools they are in need of accounting
for the wider interpretative contexts within which they function. Anderson (1991) highlighted the interrelationship between
systems of cultural production, productive relations, and communicational technologies when trying to better understand
the processes of nation development. The use of new technologies in education in general, and our specific interest in the
use of these  technologies   to benefit minorities interested  in sustaining their socio-historical  heritage, call  for serious
research efforts along these lines.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We   wish to  express  our deep  appreciation  to  Michael  Cole  from University   of  California, San Diego    and  the  Fifth
Dimension Project that served as inspiration to our work. We are also thankful to Gaby Fachler, Debi Katz, and Keri
Warshawsky from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem for their ongoing commitment and support.

REFERENCES
Anderson, B. (1991). Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Banks, J. A. (1995). Multicultural education; historical development, dimensions, and practice. In J. A. Banks & C. A. M.
Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education (pp. 3-24). New York: Macmillan.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  149

Bekerman, Z. (in press-a). Constructivist Perspectives on Language, Identity and Culture: Implications for Jewish Identity
and the Education of Jews. Religious Educacion.
Bekerman, Z. (in press-b). Towards the re-enchantment of Ethnic-Cultural education. .
Bekerman, Z., & Silverman, M. (1999). Slaves of tradition - Slaves of freedom: Social constructivist perspectives on the
'culture' of Israeli traditionalists and liberals. Israel Studies, 4(2), 90-120.
Castells, M. (1997). The power of identity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cohen, S. M. (1991). Israel in the Jewish identity of American Jews: A study in duality and contrasts. In D. M. Gordis & Y.
Ben-Horin (Eds.), Jewish identity in America (pp. 119-135). Lon Angeles: Wilstein Institute.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural Psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press.
CTGV, C. a. T. G. a. V. (1993). Designing learning environments that support thinking. In T. M. Duffy, J. Lowyck, & D.
H. Jonnassen (Eds.), Designing environments for constructivist learning (pp. 9-36). New York: Springer.
CTGV,   C. a. T.  G.  a. V. (1996). Looking    at technology in context:         A framework for understanding technology and
education research. In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of Educational Psychology (pp. 807-840). New
York: Mcmillan Library Reference USA.
Duffy, T. M., & Cunningham, D. J. (1996). Constructivism: Implications for the design and delivery of instruction. In D. H.
Jonassen  (Ed.), Handbook    of research   for educational communications           and technology (pp. 170-198). New  York:
Macmillan Library Reference USA.
Elias, N. (1998). Civilization, culture, identity: ' "Civilization" and "Culture": Nationalism and Nation State Formation': an
extract from the Germans. In J. Rundell & S. Mennell (Eds.), Classical Readings in Culture and Civilization . New York:
Routledge.
Featherstone, M. (1995). Undoing culture: Globalization, postmodernism and identity. London: SAGE.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self identity. Stanford CA: Stanford University Press.
Harre, R., & Gillett, G. (1994). The discursive mind. London: Sage.
Harris, J. (1995). Teaching teachers to use telecomputing tools. ERIC Review, 4(1), 2-6.
Holzman,   L. (1997). Schools   for growth:  Radical  alternatives to current       educational models. Mahwah,   New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Jonassen, D. H. (1994). Sometimes media influences learning. Educational Technology Research and Development, 42(2),
309-321.
Kimmerling, B. (1993). Civil society relations in Israel. In A. Ram (Ed.), Israel society: Critical perspectives (pp. 118-146
(Hebrew)): Breirot.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
McLaren, P. (1997). Revolutionary multiculturalism: Pedagogies of dissent for the new millennium. USA: Westview Press.
Means, M., & Olson, K. (1994). The link between technology and authentic learning. Educational Leadership, 51(7), 15-18.
Nichols, R. G., & Brown, V. A. (1996). Critical theory and educational technology. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of
research for educational communication and technology (pp. 226-252). New York: Macmillan Library Reference USA.
Piaget, J. (1926). The mechanism of perception (G N Seagrim, Trans.). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd.
Ridley, C. R., Mendoza, D. W., & Kanitz, B. E. (1994). Multicultural training: Reexamination, operationalization, and
integration. The Counseling Psychologist, 22(2), 227-289.
Schwandt, T. A. (1998). Constructivist, interpretativist approaches to human inquiry. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln
(Eds.), The Landscape of Qualitative Research (pp. 221-259). London: Sage Publication.
Siegel, J. (1995). The state of teacher training. Electronic Learning, 14(8), 43-53.
Smooha, S. (1998). The implications of the transition to peace for Israeli society. Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Sciences, 555, 26-45.
Varenne, H., & McDermott, R. (1998). Successful Failure: The Schools America Builds. Colorado: Westview Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Watt, I. (1997). Myths of Modern Individualism: Faust, Don Quixote, Don Juan, Robinson Crusoe. Cambridge: Cambridge
University PressW.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                               page 150

Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wertsch, J. W. (1985). The social formation of mind: A Vygotskian approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, R. (1961). Culture and society, 1780-1950. Hardmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Witmer, D. F. (1998). Introduction to computer-mediated communication: A master syllabus for teaching communication
technology. Communication Education, 47, 162-182.
