Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 160

          Cracking the Code: Learning to Collaborate and
    Collaborating to Learn in a Networked Environment
                                           Vic Lally1, Maarten de Laat2
                                University of Sheffield1 University of Nijmegen2
                                 v.lally@sheffield.ac.uk m.delaat@ped.kun.nl
ABSTRACT
This paper is based on the central idea that networked teaching may best be improved by those engaged in it. Systematic
enquiry into educational interactions can yield understandings and insights about one of the fundamental relationships of all
educational endeavours: between teaching and learning. The paper explores this relationship through analyses of teaching
and learning in a networked collaborative learning environment using two new content analysis schemas. The first of these
probes the social co-construction of knowledge in a collaborative online event by analysing the social, cognitive and
metacognitive  contributions to an  online learning event.  In the second   schema   the presence   of teacher  processes is
investigated. Computer assisted  qualitative data analysis is used   for this. In conclusion,  consideration is given to the
prospects for this type of approach as a means of enriching understandings of the complexity of the relationship between
teaching and learning in networked collaborative learning environments.

Keywords
Social constructivism, content analysis, collaborative teaching and learning, on-line tutoring

INTRODUCTION
The central idea in this paper is that networked teaching may best be improved by those engaged in it. This is based upon
the premise that systematic enquiry into educational interactions can yield understandings and insights about one of the
central relationships of all educational endeavours: between teaching and learning. Unless teachers make rich links between
their teaching 'acts' and students' learning it is difficult for them to improve their own teaching in order to improve learning.
This is not a new idea. It is self-evident in some senses: teachers will naturally claim responsibility if their students are
successful in examinations. In their attribution, their teaching acts have brought about learning in their students - as
measured by the output, examination performance. This may be a rather bold and unhelpful assertion. Firstly it is a very
general one; it offers no detailed insight into what 'worked' and what 'didn't'. Therefore, it provides no local evidence base
on which the individual teacher can act about the details of her teaching. Nor does it provide any systematic basis for
communicating the effective and efficient aspects of practice to others. Secondly it takes no pro-active account of the
different needs of students; it gives no insight into what it was about the teaching that produced 'good' measurable learning
outcomes in some of the students, nor what happened to students who didn't demonstrate these outcomes. Thirdly it equates
learning with assessable outcomes, in a way that limits the understanding of learning to the data provided by the output
measurement instrument. Learning as an ongoing set of processes, happening in time and space, within an individual and
groups, does not feature in detail in this general analysis. Fourthly it makes no connection with learning theories or, if it
does it, it is with personal and usually tacit understandings about learning held by the individual teacher. In summary, the
main problem with this self evident linking of teaching and learning is that it is un-evidenced, overlooks the diversity of
students' learning needs and processes, and generates relatively little localised insight into what works and what doesn't.
Sotto (Sotto, 1996) has argued this point very cogently: that good teaching in higher education is far from self-evident, and
that its connection to students' learning is complex, both in terms of learning outcomes at the end of a teaching and learning
event (lecture seminar or whatever) and learning processes occurring during that event.

ANALYSING NETWORKED TEACHING AND LEARNING
The networked environment provides the teacher with some new opportunities to understand the nature of teaching and its
many and complex links with learning. As the text remains available to the teacher and the students, after the primary
interactions between them have moved on, it is a resource that can be used as part of an attempt by the teacher or the
students to understand the nature of the teaching and learning that have taken place. The challenge, when looking back at
messages exchanged between students and teachers in a networked collaborative learning environment, is to understand
what Popping (Popping, 2000) has called the world of 'meanings, values and norms' which are 'invisible' to a casual
observer. In a teaching and learning context, then, it's more than trying to understand what was said about whatever subject
was under discussion  between   the learners and  the teacher. It is about  trying  to understand  the social and  cognitive
processes of knowledge and meaning construction occurring between and within individuals and the group. An important
educational aim of attempting content analysis in order to develop these understandings is broadly the same as for Action
Research in any context: to help improve the quality of the situation, in this case the learners' learning and the teacher's
teaching. In the case of this type of content analysis, the understandings created about the social and cognitive processes
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                      page  161

occurring can be used: for the immediate benefit of present learners in the context, that is, to use specific understandings to
make immediate (and probably relatively small scale) improvements to some aspects of the situation; for the benefit of
future learners in the context, by making more general improvements to aspects of the situation (perhaps structural).
The major challenge facing the teacher is how to attempt an analysis of messages, to understand the implications of this
analysis for teaching and learning, and then to act upon the situation in order to improve it for the learners, as well as for
her or  himself. Tools   for    analysing communication      patterns  have  been  developed    in several disciplines,   (for  example
applied  linguistics), but   are generally    based   upon   analysis  of  large  bodies of  text  (corpora)   and    involve  relatively
cumbersome methods. They are not designed for Action Research use in the immediacy of particular teaching and learning
situations. Furthermore, they are not designed to analyse dynamic, ongoing social situations where knowledge is actively
being co-constructed by the participants. In the next section we will describe our coding schemas and the rationale for our
choice. This is followed by a description of the educational context on which we have drawn for the analyses presented
here.

THEORETICAL BASIS OF LEARNING, TEACHING AND CONTENT ANALYSIS
In previous work (Barrett and Lally, 1999; De Laat, De Jong and Ter Huurne, 2000; De Laat, De Jong and Simons, 2001;
Lally, 2001; Lally and Barrett, 1999) we have explored a range of aspects of collaborative learning and begun to develop
analytical frameworks in order to understand the complex teaching and learning processes that are occurring. In the analysis
presented in this paper we are interested in gaining insight into collaborative knowledge construction and teacher presence
in a collaborative learning environment through the use of two compatible coding schemas. The students featured here were
following a Master's Programme in Networked Collaborative Learning (see below for details). Our analysis is based upon
work conducted by students and a tutor in the first workshop of this programme. Here we were particularly interested to
explore  the relationship   between   knowledge     construction   and    teacher presence   as these evolved   over   time   within the
workshop. Previously we have used Henri's approach to content analysis (Henri, 1989; 1992) using categories that focus on
the social activity and the interactivity of individuals in a group at the same time as giving a picture of the cognitive and
meta-cognitive processes of those individuals. However, one of its major limitations is that it gives us no impression of the
social co-construction of knowledge by the group of individuals as a group, in a discussion or a seminar. We have also
attempted to address this limitation using a schema proposed by Gunawardena et al. (1997), with some success. Influenced
principally by the work of Vygotsky (1962; 1978) (although see Gillen, 2000 for a critique of the fashionableness of this
process) many authors (for example: Goldstein, 1999; Lave, 1988; Lave, 1996; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Salomon & Perkins,
1998), in attempting to define cognition in groups (group mediated cognition or gmc), have suggested that, in a group
meeting, the situation itself may exert a strong mediating effect on individual cognitive and conceptual processes. The
thinking of  individuals   is   influenced   by the  group   in which  they   are working.   The   merger  of  intellectual   and social
processes may be a fundamental feature of group mediated cognition. A second key feature is the tension between the
conceptual structure or understanding (of the problem or ideas under discussion) of the group and that of the individuals
within it. These individual understandings may vary from each other as well as the group. This tension is the driving force
for the collective processing of the group. So, for example, when an individual member of the group expresses her opinion
in relation  to the shared    public understanding    of  the   group, this will  be   based on  an   attempt  to  synthesise   her own
understanding   with   the public  one.   The   other members     of  the group   will compare   this new  synthesis    with  their own
understandings of the group-accepted version and their own disagreements with it. Depending on the outcome of this
process there may be further interaction and negotiation until a new meaning or understanding is accepted by the group. In
this process interaction between individuals, as well as their shared and individual cognitions, are the key aspects of co-
construction of knowledge, meaning and understanding.
We have premised our present analysis on this `social-constructivist' view of learning: learners linking new knowledge to
their prior  knowledge-    i.e. learning  as  a cumulative   process:  learners   constructing  new   internal representations    of the
information being presented (Boekaerts & Simons, 1995). Learning is a process by which the learner personalizes new
information  by  giving    meaning   to  it, based  upon   earlier experiences.   Meaning    is seen  as  rooted   in, and  indexed  by
experience (Brown, et al., 1989). Each experience with an idea, and the environment of which that idea is part, becomes
part of the meaning of that idea (Duffy & Jonassen, 1992). Learning is therefore understood as situated in the activity in
which it takes place (Brown, et al. 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Whereas the social-constructivist perspectives makes a
distinction between the individual cognitive activities and the environment in which the individual is present, the socio-
cultural perspective   regards   the individual   as  being  part  of that  environment.   They    point out  that learning   cannot  be
understood as a process that is solely in the mind of the learner (Van Boxtel, 2000). Knowledge is constructed in settings of
joint activity (Koschmann, 2000). Learning is a process of participating in cultural practices a process that structures and
shapes   cognitive  activity  (Lave  &    Wenger,   1991).   The   socio-cultural  perspective  gives  prominence      to the aspect  of
mutuality of the relations between members and emphasizes the dialectic nature of the learning interaction (Sfard, 1998).
Construction of knowledge takes place in a social context, such as might be found in collaborative activities of the MEd in
Networked Collaborative Learning featured in this paper (see McConnell, 2000 for a much more detailed exploration of
collaborative   learning). In   addition,  Lethinen   et al. (1999)    argues that  conceptual   understanding     is  fostered through
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  162

explaining a problem to other students. Therefore, in collaborative learning it is necessary to formulate learning objectives,
to make learning plans, to share information, to negotiate about knowledge and to take decisions (Veldhuis-Diermanse &
Biemans, 2000). In a setting of collaborative learning, students can criticize their own and other students' contributions,
they can ask for explanations, they can give counter arguments and, in this way, they will stimulate themselves and the
other students. Additionally, they can motivate and help each other to finish the task. Social-constructivist collaborative
learning is a powerful educational method to realise academic goals. In the MEd programme the tutor acts as in three
important ways: to design the curriculum and the environment, in outline; to facilitate discourse among participants, and to
provide some direct instruction related to the topics under discussion. However, it is important to acknowledge that these
roles may also be undertaken by the students in this course environment. In networked learning settings we see that learners
become tutors and that tutors become learners (Gartner & Riessman, 2000). Their roles interact and change over time. The
original role of the teacher moves from a central position towards a guide on the side, fostering an online learning culture in
which participants take charge of their own learning (Collison, 2000).
In order to probe collaborative knowledge construction and teacher presence in this learning environment we used two new
coding  schemas.   The  first, modified   from  Veldhuis-Diermanse     and  Biemans   (2000)    was  used    to  investigate group
knowledge construction. This included four main categories. The first is cognitive activities (thinking activities) students
use to process the learning content and to attain their learning goals. The category 'cognitive activities' consists of three
subcategories: (1)   debating,   (2) using  external   information and  experiences   and   (3)  linking     or repeating   internal
information. The second category is metacognitive activities: metacognition refers to metacognitive knowledge as well as
to metacognitive skills. Metacognitive knowledge can be defined as knowledge concerning one's own cognitive processes
and products or anything related to them. Metacognitive skills concern the extent to which students can regulate their
cognitive activities and, therefore, their own learning process. These skills are essential to successful learning because they
enable  individuals to manage    their cognitive skills, and  to  determine problems   that can  be   solved    by applying   other
cognitive skills. The third category is affective activities. These are used to cope with feelings occurring during learning
and can lead to a state of mind influencing the learning process positively, negatively or neutrally (Vermunt, 1992). The
final category, miscellaneous, was used to score all other units. This category includes social talk as well as units that can
not be coded according to one of the other categories. The second schema, adapted from Anderson and Rourke et al.
(2000), is used to probe teacher presence. This includes three main sub-categories. The first, design and organization, refers
to the  construction of the    processes,  structures, evaluation  and  interaction components     of    the course.  The   second,
facilitating discourse, refers to the maintenance of interest, motivation and engagement of students in active learning. The
term discourse is used, rather than discussion, to highlight the focused and sustained deliberation that marks learning in a
community   of  inquiry  (Lipman,    1991)   or as Scardamalia     and Bereiter  (1994)   refer to   it, the  knowledge-building
community. The third sub-category is direct instruction. This refers to the teacher's provision of intellectual and scholarly
leadership and the sharing of subject matter knowledge with students. Davie (1989) describes this as the ability to set and
communicate    the  intellectual climate  of the  course  or  seminar,  and model    the  qualities  of   a  scholar. The    teacher
communicates   content   knowledge     that  is enhanced   by    the teacher's   personal  interest,  excitement      and  in-depth
understanding of the content. The cognitive apprenticeship model espoused by Collins & Brown (1991), Rogoff's (1995)
model of apprenticeship in thinking or Vygotsky's (1978) scaffolding analogies illustrate an assistive role for teachers in
providing instructional support to students from their position of greater content knowledge.

COMPUTER ASSISTANCE FOR CONTENT ANALYSIS
In the process of analysing teaching and learning situations in a networked collaborative learning environment, messages
from a learning event need to be coded and analysed. The central purpose of coding is to extract, generalise and abstract
from the complexity of the original data in order to find significant themes and develop theories about the situation that
illuminate it. This is a delicate balance between oversimplification, resulting in the loss of subtlety and insight into complex
processes, and over-coding where the themes and trends are still obscured by too many sub-categories. Bearing these
dangers in mind, we decided to use computer assisted data analysis software (CAQDAS). The main advantages of such an
approach include: partial automation of the coding process, with increased speed of coding; a wider range of ways to
search, recode and interrogate the coded data (in this case messages), including visual coding and more sophisticated
coding at 'nodes' - this allows instantaneous access to all the text coded for a particular category; the possibility to code
creatively, that is, to develop new codes, and re-code, in response to the patterns in the coded data as they emerge (a
grounded approach). A helpful account of some of the issues around the use of CAQDAS have been provided by Barry
(Barry, 1998).  One    powerful   package   which  we    have found    suitable for coding  networked        collaborative learning
interactions is QSR NUD*IST Vivo (NVivo) (Qualitative Solutions and Research, 1999). This package offers powerful
tools for coding and interpretation of coded conferences and events from on-line situations. The messages can easily be
imported directly into NVivo for coding, and nodes created from any categories used for coding. A very useful overview of
the use of NVivo in this type of work is provided by Richards (Richards, 1999).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page    163

THE MASTER'S PROGRAMME IN NETWORKED COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
The MEd in Networked Collaborative Learning by action research is an advanced part-time programme designed to provide
participants with a  comprehensive   grounding     in the theory   and   application of networked   teaching  and  learning.  The
programme focuses on learning about information and communication technologies; designing online learning; developing
learning communities; and working with online groups of collaborative learners. The MEd programme is suitable for a
wide variety of professional people who wish to develop their understanding of, and expertise in, this form of learning.
Current   participants include:  professional trainers    and developers,   self  employed    or in public    and private sector
organizations; teachers and lecturers in Further, Higher and Open Education; adult continuing educators; people working in
libraries and resource centers; open and distance learning educators and developers. The programme is based upon the
establishment  of a  research  learning  community    among    the participants  and  tutors. In this community    activities are
undertaken around five workshops over a two year period. In brief, the workshop structure is:

Year One
Workshop One (4 months online): An Introduction to Online Learning
Workshop Two (4 months online): Networked Learning and Computer Supported Cooperative Work
Workshop Three (4 months on-line): The Internet as a Learning Environment
Year Two
Workshop Four (3 months on-line): Designing for Research and Evaluation
Workshop Five (9 months online): Research Dissertation
RESULTS
Figures 1 to 4 show the results of coding three samples from one learning set of workshop one of the MEd. In this analysis
we have attempted to reveal the social co-construction of knowledge in a set of threaded discussions undertaken by a
sophisticated group of adult learners. At the same time, we have also tried to reveal the teaching processes that may be
supporting this co-construction. In attempting to make sense of this analysis it is important to understand the pedagogical
context of their work. The participants collaborated for approximately 10 weeks in order to construct a group project around
an aspect of networked learning. It is this collaboration that forms the focus of the analysis presented here. The overall
structure of the activity was predetermined by the course tutor team, and published in the WebCT group space well in
advance of the commencement of the activity. The group had previously spent approximately one month together in the
online space, engaged in a set of activities designed to support the establishment and development of the research learning
community. The project work followed on from this process. Each learning `set' or sub-community was assigned a tutor.
The three tutors shared a common approach, with an agreement to some variation according to the tutor's own views and
style of working. The approach consisted of supporting and facilitating the group's work, and providing some knowledge
input when appropriate, according to the tutor's own expertise and interests. In many respects the tutor undertook to behave
as a participant in the group, rather than as a leader or more traditional instructor. Therefore, there is little evidence of direct
instruction by either the tutor, or other participants, in any of the discussions featured in this analysis. This is typical of the
`style' of teaching espoused by the course tutor team for the course as a whole. In all cases we coded units of meaning with
either the appropriate  subcategory  of  the learning  schema   or  the  teaching  schema. These    were used   exclusively.  The
collaborative project of this set consisted of approximately 1000 messages. Our sample, at the beginning, middle and end of
this discussion consists of approximately 10 per cent of that total.
Figure One. Early Phase of Discussions (x axis = days; y axis = percentage of all coded units of meaning)

Learning (After Veldhuis-Diermanse & Biemans, 2000)

   100
    90
    8070                                                                                                  misc
    60                                                                                                    aff
    50
    40                                                                                                    meta
    3020                                                                                                  cog
    10
     0
        1         2          3         4         5          6          7         8          9        10
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page   164

Teaching (After Anderson, et al.,2000)

   100
    90
    80
    7060                                                                                                    dir instr
    50                                                                                                      facil
    4030                                                                                                    design
    20
    10
     0
       1         2          3           4         5         6         7         8          9         10

The first sample of discussion threads occurs in the early phase of the group collaborative project (figure 1 and 30-10 to 9-
11 in figure 4). At this point the students were formulating their project, with the aid of the tutor, and agreeing procedures
to facilitate their work together. The main features of this phase of group activities include a high level of cognitive activity,
as indicated using the learning schema to code the interactions. This activity is in a ratio of approximately 3.3:1 with
metacognitive activity. There are two discernible peaks in learning activity. These coincide with peaks in teaching activity.
Much of the teaching has been coded as design and organization discussion, together with facilitation. The simultaneous
peaking of the teaching and learning discussion within the group indicates a strong linkage between these two types of
processes. There is little direct instruction taking place in the group's deliberations.
Figure Two. Middle Phase of Discussions (x axis = days; y axis = percentage of all coded units of meaning)

Learning (After Veldhuis-Diermanse &Biemans, 2000)

   100
    90
    80
    70                                                                                                        misc
    60                                                                                                        aff
    50
    40                                                                                                        meta
    3020                                                                                                      cog
    10
     0
       1         2          3            4         5          6         7         8          9         10

Teaching (After Anderson, et al.,2000)

   100
    90
    80
    70
    60                                                                                                      dir instr
    50                                                                                                      facil
    4030                                                                                                    design
    20
    10
     0
       1         2          3           4         5         6         7         8          9         10

In the second  sample  of   threads    (figure  2 and   5-12  to 11-12  in figure   4) the students  were   well   advanced   with the
development and compilation of their collaborative project. The level of cognitive activity is raised further as a proportion
of all learning sub-categories, compared to the early threads (70 per cent compared to 60 per cent in the early threads). This
corresponds to a   relative reduction      in affective activity from   16 per cent    to 10   per cent,  suggesting   that social and
motivational comments offered to one another by group members have reduced as their working relationship becomes
established and they focus more on the task in hand. Metacognitive activity shows little change overall (18 per cent in the
early phase and 20 per cent in the middle phase) and its ratio to cognitive activity stays quite constant at 3.5:1. It is
interesting to note that within teaching activity there has been a major shift of emphasis. In the early phase 50 per cent of
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                page 165

the teaching activity was coded as design and organization, and 35 per cent was facilitation. In the middle phase the design
and organisation has decreased to 25 per cent and facilitation to 75 per cent. This is compatible with the notion that much of
the organizational arrangements have been made for the project, and the students and tutor are now helping each other to
discuss and explore the project as they work. There is one large peak of learning activity, occurring early in this phase
(around 6-12). Once again we see this peak at the same time as the peak in teaching activity, as with the early phase thread
sample. This underscores the linkage in time already identified between learning and teaching aspects of the discussions
observed in the early phase.
Figure Three. Concluding Phase of Discussions (x axis = days; y axis = percentage of all coded units of meaning)

Learning (After Veldhuise-Diermanse & Biemans, 2000)

   100
    90
    80
    70                                                                                                                                                  misc
    60                                                                                                                                                  aff
    50
    40                                                                                                                                                  meta
    30                                                                                                                                                  cog
    20
    10
        0
          1              2              3              4              5              6              7              8              9              10

Teaching (After Anderson, et al., 2000)

    100
     90
     80
     70                                                                                                                                                dir instr
     60
     50
     40                                                                                                                                                facil
     30
     2010                                                                                                                                              design
      0
        1              2              3              4              5              6              7              8              9             10

In the third (concluding) sample of threads (figure 3 and 29-12 to 14-1 of figure 4) the project work is drawing to a close
and students, together with their tutor, are reflecting on the process and discussing their preparations for the presentation of
their work to the other groups. Within the learning discussions, the balance between cognitive and metacognitive activity
has shifted to a ratio of 1.9:1 (42 per cent of cognitive activity and 22 percent of metacognitive activity), as a result of an
overall decrease in cognitive discussion. At the same time, the level of metacognitive discussion has stayed almost constant.
Affective discussion is at a similar level to the middle phase (10 per cent), with miscellaneous discussion activity appearing
in this   phase  to      replace,       to some        extent, the      cognitive      discussions.      Within        the   teaching      activity     there    is still a strong
emphasis on facilitation (65 per cent). However, this has reduced from the middle phase, with a concomitant small increase
in design    and organization              as the      students       think about       their       presentation     to the       other   groups.     Once       again  we  see an
alignment, in time, between the learning and teaching activity within the group, but with some notable differences. There
are three peaks of activity (3-1, 9-1 and 13-1). All of the learning peaks are aligned, in time, with peaks for teaching. One
noticeable   difference      in   the      learning      peaks,       when  compared          to      earlier      patterns,      is that in     the first   peak   the maximum
cognitive and metacognitive levels coincide. However, in the second smaller peak the raised level of metacognitive activity
precedes the cognitive activity. In the third learning peak there is raised cognitive activity, but this is not associated with a
rise in metacognitive discussion.
In our view, some clear patterns have emerged from our analysis. Using two coding schemas, for teaching and learning, and
coding contributions to the discussion over time, has enabled us to interrogate the complex relationship between these
processes within a group. The most striking feature of the discussions in the group is that, within the discernible peaks of
discussion activity, high levels of learning and teaching are co-incident in time. This is a clear pattern that can be seen
throughout the samples of the three phases of activity. While it is not possible to describe this relationship as causal, the
analysis does indicate a strong linkage of these two types of activity within the group as a whole. At this level the analysis
does not enable us to identify whether some individuals are acting in a teacherly way while others are learning. This will be
probed in future analyses. However, the pattern is consistent and deserves further attention to attempt to understand the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                    page   166

nature and significance of the interaction in more detail. Further patterns are identifiable. The levels of cognitive activity
throughout the discussions are in the order of two to three times higher than for metacognitive activity.
Figure Four. Learning and teaching interaction (x axis = days; y axis = percentage of all coded units of meaning)

    100
     90
     80
     70                                                                                                                                                       teaching
     60
     50
     40                                                                                                                                                       learning
     30
     20
     10
       0
         1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20   21   22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29   30

Yet peaks in both types of activity occur together. This suggests to us that regulative activities, of the types indicated by the
metacognitive learning categories we have used, are associated with discussions about the topic, and may be a necessary
part of increased levels of cognitive activity associated with this. Once again, it is not possible to see the partitioning of
these functions between group members at the level of analysis we have employed. We shall undertake this as part of
further work. In one case, in the concluding phase, the metacognitive peak precedes the cognitive one, rather than being co-
incident with it in time. This suggests that metacognitive `regulatory' processes may play a different role in relation to the
more `subject-focused' cognitive discussions, depending on the overall stage or context of the work being undertaken.
Furthermore, the nature of teaching activity changes within the group over time. In the early phase of discussions there is a
relatively high level of design and organisation as the group prepares for the task. As the task proceeds this is replaced by
facilitation of discussion that continues for the remainder of the work. At the same time, as the task is concluded the levels
of cognitive activity decrease, while the level of metacognitive discsussion remains constant.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The aim of this paper is to explore the relationship between teaching and learning in a networked collaborative learning
environment.         For       this purpose        we     used     two       new   content       analysis       schemas.        The      first of   these     probes    the social co-
construction of knowledge (learning) in a collaborative online event by analysing the affective, cognitive and metacognitive
contributions to the event. In the second schema, the presence of teacher processes (teaching) is revealed and discriminated
using sub-categories for design and organisation, facilitation of discussion, and direct instruction (after Anderson et. al.,
2000). In each of these analyses we employed a range of linguistic indicators for the types of activity we were coding.
These have not been presented in this paper for reasons of space, but are available in Anderson et. al. (2000), and Veldhuis-
Diermanse and Biemans (2000).
These analyses begin to reveal the detail of the processes occurring as a group works to construct new knowledge and
understanding over time. Furthermore they indicate that high levels of teacher functions are occurring as this construction
proceeds, and seem to be interacting with it in regular, discernible but complex ways. Regulation of cognitive activity is
revealed to be an ongoing process, often but not always co-incident with it, indicating the possibility of more than one
mode of interaction between cognitive and metacognitive processes. All of these functions are undertaken by many of the
participants in the group. There is no strong indication that the tutor is initiating these processes within this discussion.
However, further and more detailed analysis will be required to explore the precise nature of the tutor's role as a participant
within the group. The triggering mechanisms for peaks of activity remain to be identified, as does the process by which
these become magnified within the group into high levels of learning and teaching.
These analyses, using two compatible coding schemas and allied to a computer assisted approach to coding, have enabled
us to characterise a substantial collaborative learning and teaching event within the MEd. in Networked Collaborative
Learning. However, many questions still remain to be answered. We have not looked in detail at the correlations between
learning and teaching processes and learning outcomes. The group featured in this analysis was a high functioning group
that created a substantial report of high quality. There was good participation by all members of the group. In this sense the
processes illuminated in this paper represent those of a high achieving group collaborating on an extended project. The
group members were contributing both learning and teaching activity to the group processes. Our analysis does not feature
the nature of individual processes within the group. It is not possible, therefore, to elucidate the interactions between the
individual as a learning entity and the group as another learning entity. This will have to wait for future analysis, and is part
of our     ongoing        project    to   fully     analyse        the   nature    of   all      of   the  learning       and   teaching       interactions      occurring   within  a
collaborating group. A further limitation of our analysis is that it is based only on those processes that are articulated by
group members. Processes that are not articulated may be having an effect on the explicit processes, but they are hidden
from direct analysis. In order to understand these processes we shall, in future investigations, use stimulated recall by
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 167

participants at significant points in the development of the expressed processes. With this data it may then be possible to
relate the hidden processes in the event to those that we can see expressed on the screen.
The title of this paper reflects our concern to `crack the code' of learning and teaching processes occurring in real, complex
events in collaborative online education. Our analysis reveals a complexity and time-related development of these processes
that can be correlated with the structure of the educational task and the skills required by group members to address it
successfully. We are optimistic that the approach we have described and used here will enable us to probe a range of
different events and understand the processes revealed in ways that can yield insights that may be of value to online
educators in many contexts. We shall report this work in further papers in due course.

REFERENCES
Anderson, T.,  Rourke,  L.,  Garrison, D. R. and   Archer,  W.  (2000).     Assessing  Teaching   Presence in  a  Computer
        Conferencing Context. http://www.atl.ualberta.ca/cmc/publications.html [27/3/2001]
Barrett, E., & Lally, V. (1999). Gender differences in an on-line learning environment. Journal of Computer Assisted
        Learning, 15(1), 48-60.
Barry, C. A. (1998). Choosing Qualitative Data Analysis Software: Atlas/ti and Nudist Compared. Sociological Research
        Online, 3(3), 1-17.
Boekaerts, M. & Simons, P.R.J. (1995). Leren en instructie: psychologie van de leerling en het leerproces [Learning and
        instruction: psychology of the learner and his learning process]. Assen: Dekker & Van de Vegt.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher,
        18(1), 32-42.
Collins A. & Brown J. S. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making things visible. American Educator 15(3) 38-46.
Collison, G., Elbaum, B., Haavind, S., & Tinker, R. (2000). Facilitating online learning: Effective strategies for moderators.
        Madison: Atwood.
Davie, L. (1989). Facilitation  techniques  for the  on-line   tutor, In R.   Mason    and    A. Kaye  (Eds.), Mindweave:
        Communication, computers and distance education (pp. 74-85). Oxford: Pergamon Press,.
De Laat, M., De Jong, F., and Ter Huurne, J. (2000). Supporting a Community of Practice: The Role of Workers as
        Learners. Paper presented at Ed-Media, Montreal, Canada June 26 2000.
De Laat,  M., De  Jong,  F., and Simons,   R-J. (2001). Supporting     Self Regulation     of Learning Activities in Online
        Communities   of Practice. Poster paper   presented at the First  European     Conference  on  Computer   Supported
        Collaborative Learning, Maastricht, Netherlands, March 2001.
Duffy, T. M., & Jonassen, D. H. (1992). Constructivism: new implications for instructional technology. In T. M. Duffy &
        D. H. Jonassen (Eds.), Constructivism and the technology of instruction: a conversation. New Jersey: Lawrence
        Erlbaum associates.
Gartner, A., & Riessman, F. (2000). Peer-tutoring: Toward a new model. http://www.educationplanet.com.
Gillen, J. (2000). Versions of Vygotsky. British Journal of Educational Studies, 48(2), 183-198.
Goldstein, L. S. (1999). The relational zone: The role of caring relationships in the co-construction of mind. American
        Educational Research Journal, 36(3), 647-673.
Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of a Global Online Debate and the Development of an
        Interaction Analysis Model for Examining Social Construction of Knowledge in Computer Conferencing. Journal
        of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 397-431.
Henri, F. (1989). La Téléconference assistée par ordinateur dans une activité de formation à distance. Unpublished Thèse de
        doctorat, Concordia University, Montreal.
Henri, F. (1992). Computer Conferencing and Content Analysis. In A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative Learning Through
        Computer Conferencing: The Najaden Papers (pp. 117-136). London: Springer-Verlag.
Koschmann, T. (1999). Toward a dialogic theory of learning: Bakhtin's contribution to understanding learning in settings
        of collaboration. Paper presented at the CSCL'99, Palo Alto.
Lally, V. (2001). Analysing Teaching and Learning in a Networked Collaborative Learning Environment: Issues and Work
        in Progress. In Day, C. W. and van Veen, D. (Eds.), Educational Research in Europe Yearbook 2001 (pp. 219-
        237). Leuven: Garant/EERA.
Lally, V. E., & Barrett, E. (1999). Building a Learning Community On-Line: towards socio-academic interaction. Research
        Papers in Education, 14(2), 147-163.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page   168

Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J. (1996). Teaching as Learning, in Practice. Mind, Culture and Activity, 3(3), 149-164.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press.
Lethinen, E., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L. Rahikainen, M. & Muukkonen, H. (1999). Computer supported collaborative
       learning: A review. CL-Net Project. Available: http://www.kas.utu.fi/clnet/clnetreport.html [1999, August 17].
Lipman, M. Thinking in education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
McConnell, D. (2000). Implementing Computer Supported Co-operative Learning. London: Kogan Page.
Popping, R. (2000). Computer Assisted Text Analysis. London: Sage.
       Qualitative Solutions and Research. (1999). QSR NUD*IST Vivo (NVivo) (Version 1.1). London: Sage.
Richards, L. (1999). Using NVivo   in Qualitative   Research. Bundoora, Victoria,  Australia:    Qualitative Solutions and
       Research.
Rogoff, B. (1995). Apprenticeship in thinking. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Salomon, G., & Perkins. D. N. (1998). Individual and Social Aspects of Learning. Review of Research in Education, 23, 1-
       24.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 3(3), 265-283,.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational researcher, 27(2), 4-13.
Sotto, E. (1996). The Self-evident Nature of Teaching. Innovations in Education and Training International, 33(3), 203-
       209.
Van Boxtel, C. (2000). Collaborative Concept Learning: collaborative learning tasks, student interaction and the learning
       of physics concepts., Universiteit Utrecht
Veldhuis-Diermanse, A. E. and Biemans, H. J. A. (2000). Is CSCL an adequate tool to reach a deep level of academic
       learning? Submitted to Learning and Instruction
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and Language (E. Hanfmann and G. Vakar, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society: the development of higher psychological processes (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S.
       Scribner and E. Souberman, Trans.). Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
