Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  179

          Re-contextualization of Teaching and Learning in
     Videoconference-based Environments: An Empirical
                                                       Study
                                          Ulf Hedestig, Victor Kaptelinin
                                              Umea University, Sweden
                              uhstig@informatik.umu.se, vklinin@informatik.umu.se
ABSTRACT
The paper reports an empirical study of the use of videoconferences in decentralized university education. The study
focuses   on  breakdowns    that  occur   during  the  transition  of  educational     practices  from regular     classrooms  to
videoconference-based environments. It was found that the main cause of breakdowns was discoordinations of teaching and
learning  resulting from  physical  and organizational distribution    of decentralized  education.  The     paper concludes  that
implementation of educational activities in new types of learning environments requires both downwards contextualization,
an adaptation to the limitations and affordances of the environment, and upwards contextualization, locating the activity in
a larger-scale context.

Keywords
Decentralized education, learning environments, videoconference settings, breakdowns, activity theory

INTRODUCTION
One of the main ideas behind the current trend towards "virtual universities" (Cunningham et al., 1998) is a possibility to
make  a  better use  of educational expertise of   university teachers.   It is  assumed that   information  and   communication
technologies (ICT) allow for extending educational activities of a university to include students who cannot participate in
traditional on-campus education. Such an extension, which takes various forms (Lau, 2000), presents a challenge to CSCL
research. Traditional university education has been shaped by centuries of historical development. Moving from traditional
classrooms to "new communication environments" (Mantovani, 1996) cannot be accomplished by a direct translation of
existing educational practices into a new setting. Instead, it requires a re-contextualization of teaching and learning and
development of new social organization within the setting. This notion, which is widely accepted in the field of CSCL
(Koschmann, 1996), has, unfortunately, not influenced much of practical developments in distance education, web-based
learning, and so forth.
The study presented in this paper addresses the problem of re-contextualization of teaching and learning in ICT-based
environments by focusing on coordination breakdowns of educational activities under new conditions and the emerging
practices of coping   with such  breakdowns   in  everyday    educational    use of technology.  The   object  of  our study was
decentralized education at a Swedish university (thereafter, "the University"). More specifically, we were interested in the
use of videoconferences within decentralized courses delivered by the University to students living in other towns. The
reason behind choosing this specific form of technology-based education was that videoconferences could be considered
the closest match to traditional classroom settings. One of the reasons behind the widespread use of videoconferences at the
University has been an assumption that practically any teacher can successfully use his or her experience with delivering
traditional courses in a videoconference setting. In a pilot study by Esbjörnsson (1997) it was shown that this assumption
was not correct. Successful teaching and learning in a videoconference setting was found to be associated with special types
of arrangements and expertise, which could be rather complex and difficult to accomplish. The lack of such arrangements
and expertise resulted in various problems and breakdowns. In the present study we specifically focus on breakdowns in
videoconference   settings to identify  potential problems    related to  attempts  to  deliver  traditional courses  in the new
environment.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Immediately follows a brief overview of conceptual frameworks that can be
used in studies of coordination breakdowns and the reasons why activity theory has been selected as the main theoretical
approach employed in the study. Then a background information about the University is provided, as well as a description
of videoconference-based learning environments analyzed in the paper. After that the method and the findings of the study
are presented.  Finally, implications  of the findings  for   analysis and   design  of  ICT-based  learning   environments   are
discussed.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page  180

POTENTIAL              CONCEPTUAL              FRAMEWORKS                 FOR      STUDYING             COORDINATION
BREAKDOWNS
A variety of approaches seem to be plausible frameworks for studying coordination breakdowns in videoconference-based
learning   environments.  They   include,  among   others,  coordination  theory, distributed  cognition, situated actions, and
activity theory. Each of these approaches, from out point of view, has its strengths and weaknesses.
Coordination   theory   (Malone  and  Crowston,   1992,  1994;   Crowston  and    Osborn, 1998)   focuses  on various   types  of
dependencies between actors and activities within one coherent system. It provides powerful generalized representations
that can   be used for   capturing  and  re-designing a  wide  range   of processes,  such as  business   processes. In case   of
videoconference-based learning environments the main problem is, however, not to optimize and streamline dependencies
between activities but rather to discover what these activities are and what they could be. Coordination theory appears to be
a useful analytical tool at a later stage of analysis, when the basic components and structures of teaching and learning in the
setting are identified and understood.
Distributed   cognition  can  be characterized  in a  similar way,   despite all  the differences between   this  approach  and
coordination theory. The distributed cognition framework makes it possible to create detailed and insightful representations
of how people and artifacts are coordinated within a coherent system. According to Hutchins, "One important aspect of the
social distribution [...] is that the knowledge required to carry out the coordinating actions is not discretely contained inside
the various individuals. Rather, much of the knowledge is intersubjectively shared among the members of the team"
(Hutchins, 1995, p. 219) Such sharing can only be possible if a common ground for intersubjectivity has been established
through evolutionary development of a settings. It is often not the case when it comes to videoconference-based learning
environments.   In fact,   in  our earlier work   we  found   a  very  different  phenomenon.    Successful   functioning   of a
videoconference as a setting critically depended on the expertise of one concrete individual, the facilitator. Ironically, the
importance of this "invisible" expertise was not recognized by the managers responsible for the setting (Hedestig, 2000).
The situated actions approach (Suchman, 1987), which is partly based on conversation analysis, provides a number of
useful insights into   coordination mechanisms     necessary  to make  videoconference    environments    work. In particular, it
emphasizes that communication is "not so much as alternating series of actions and reactions between individuals as it is a
joint action accomplished through the participants' continuous engagement in speaking and listening." (Suchman, 1987, p.
71)  Therefore, flexibility,  coherence,  and resources necessary   to remedy    communicative   troubles  should  be important
concerns in design of learning environments. However, the potential of situated actions as a guiding approach in addressing
the above issues appears to be limited. Even though the importance of communicative resources can be clearly identified,
the ways to provide such resources given the constraints of a specific setting may remain an open issue. Besides, the notion
of plans as a weak resource of an action (Suchman, 1987) is hardly applicable to many learning environments, since actions
in environments of this kind are often strictly determined by a number of plans, such as course schedules.
Finally, activity theory   that  focuses on  hierarchically organized,   mediated,  and  developing  individual  and  collective
activities can  help   formulate   some  key  questions and   provide  conceptual  tools  helping to address    these questions
(Kaptelinin, 1996)*. Formulating key issues for a systematic empirical analysis, based on activity theory, appears to be a
promising     starting  point  for  understanding  the   differences   between    traditional  on-campus   courses    and   their
videoconference-based versions. Representations of these two types of learning as activities can help identify goals specific
for each setting, as well as essentially common goals, that are being accomplished in different settings through different
operations. A useful concept that can be utilized in the above analysis is the notion of mutual transformations between
individual and collective activities (Kaptelinin, Cole, 1997). The main limitation of activity theory is that this approach is
rather abstract and needs to be made more concrete by developing concepts and representations specific for a domain in
question (cf. Kaptelinin, Nardi, Macaulay, 1999).
Therefore, even though a theoretical framework that can be directly used for analysis of coordination and re-coordination in
videoconference-based learning environments does not exist yet, a number of frameworks can provide useful insights (c.f.
Nardi, 1996). In our study we relied mostly on activity theory. Following the principles of this approach, we focused on
actors participating in the setting, their goals and sub-goals, with special attention to conflicts between various goals,
mediating artifacts, and developmental transformations of individual and collective activities.

THE USE OF VIDEOCONFERENCES AT THE UNIVERSITY: A SETTING IN A CONTEXT
The University has a strong history of distance and decentralized education. Decentralized education, which combines
traditional classroom activities with distance learning, has become the main form of off-campus education at the University.
Over 5000 students located outside the University campus (the distance is ranging from 100 km to 700 km) are currently

* Space limitations do not allow for an extensive discussion of activity theory in this paper. A detailed exposition of this
 approach can be found elsewhere (e.g., Leontiev, 1978).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  181

participating in various courses and programs. The University is the major educational and research center in Northern
Sweden, and to meet current demands it is more and more involved in decentralized education, gradually transforming itself
into a "virtual" university. The gradual character of the transition is important, because it provides a possibility for the
University to try various forms of decentralization without radical changes of the whole system and to capitalize upon
existing expertise of the teachers. As mentioned above, that was one of the main reasons why videoconferences have been
so widely used at the University.
Videoconference-based learning settings at the University are composed of two main types of components: (a) the teacher's
site, or video studio, located on campus, and (b) the students' site (or sites), a videoconference classroom at a so-called
"study center" located off campus. A typical arrangement of these sites is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. A typical structure of a videoconference setting. At the teacher's site the teacher can use a whiteboard or
an electronic  whiteboard (1);    at all sites   there are document   cameras for  slides     (2), two or   more stationary
microphones (3), TV-monitor(s), a video recorder and camera (4), and remote controls (6). At the teacher's site
there is also a computer connected to the videoconference system (5).

The teacher's site. When teachers use videoconference settings at the university they follow the same teaching styles as in
traditional classroom teaching, that is, traditional lectures, seminars, and tutoring sessions (Hedestig, Kaptelinin, 2001). The
studios are relatively small but include seating arrangements for groups up to 10-15 persons. The equipment consists of a
document camera, an electronic whiteboard, a computer, a projector, TV-monitors, and hands-free microphones. The most
common types of activity at video studios are lectures delivered by teachers to one or more student sites.
The students' site. The videoconference equipment at the students' site is usually installed in a traditional classroom at a
local study center, that is, a room with rows of tables and chairs. Such an arrangement directs students' attention towards
the monitor, that is, towards the teacher. Devices, such as cameras and microphones, can vary depending on how much a
study center can afford to invest in equipment. Most study centers provide a camera, a document camera, a TV-monitor for
incoming and outgoing images and one or two microphones (see Figure 1). Usually there is a student at the students' site,
who is responsible for the remote control connected to the equipment. At students' sites there are usually no technicians or
facilitators to provide support during sessions.

VIDEOCONFERENCE-BASED LEARNING ­ A WEB OF POTENTIAL BREAKDOWNS
The findings reported in this section are based on (a) field observation of videoconference sessions (about 100 hours in
total), (b) interviews with teachers, students, and technicians/facilitators, and (c) a one-year ethnographic study of the work
of a videoconference facilitator. The field observations have been conducted both at students' sites and teacher's sites.
During these sessions we also recorded certain events, such as turn taking and breakdowns. The interviews were both
unstructured and semi-structured.   Most  of unstructured  interviews were first interviews   with   new   informants. Semi-
structured interviews were based on the Activity Checklist (Kaptelinin, Nardi, Macaulay, 1999). In the ethnographic study
of facilitator's work one of us had been closely observing the facilitator almost every day for over a year and interviewing
him both before and after each session.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                     page 182

In our field observations we have identified different types of coordination breakdowns. It should be noted that this paper
does not deal with technical breakdowns, which are left beyond the scope of the present study (analysis of them can be
found in, e.g., Dallat et al, 1992; Abbot et al, 1993; Rosengren 1993). Our findings, which are presented below, are divided
into two main groups. When dealing with coordination breakdowns identified in the study the first and the most basic
distinction was between (a) breakdowns caused by certain aspects of the settings and (b) breakdowns caused by factors
existing in the larger context, outside the videoconference setting. These groups of breakdowns can be interpreted as
indicators of two types of contextualization of activities, introduced by Engeström (1990): downward contextualization,
that is, an adaptation of activities to the limitations and affordances of the environment, and upwards contextualization, that
is, locating activities in a larger-scale organizational and inter-organizational context.

Downwards contextualization: Breakdowns originating from within the setting
Coordination breakdowns at students' sites
Most of the students' sites had the traditional classroom arrangement with few cameras and microphones. At sites where
each student had an opportunity to control the camera and audio there were more spontaneous questions than at sites where
students had to share a microphone and a remote control (see Table 1). Students from sites with only one camera and one or
two microphones often commented on the difficulty of asking questions:
        "It's impossible to ask spontaneous or short questions during a video session. It takes too much time. First I have to ask
        someone to give me the microphone. Then I have to ask the student who has the remote control to push the mute-button, so the
        teacher can hear me. At the same time the student also has to direct the camera towards me. This process takes too much time,
        and many of us do not bother to even think of asking a question"
        "Since it is necessary for us to push the mute-button at our site, it takes too long time to ask the teacher a question. Instead
        many of us so to speak seat back and watch the 'show'. We see it more as a TV-broadcast program, and a TV-program that you
        never interrupt! If there is something unclear we prefer to ask questions afterwards, if at all."

Interactions are further complicated by the fact that students are looking at the same direction, so they do not face each
other and cannot use nonverbal cues. Instead of talking to each other they mostly address the student(s) who has the
microphone and the remote control.
A way of handling the coordinated use of equipment by the students was to move the student in charge of the technology in
front of the room so that he or she could face the group. A common problem with this type of seating arrangement was a
role conflict experienced by the student in charge of technology. The student had to choose whether to pay attention to the
teacher and take notes or watch for any cues from the students and work with the cameras and microphones.
The role of a technician seldom shifted from student to student. A student who was a "designated technician" in the
beginning of a course usually remained in this role during the rest of the course. The result was that the whole class became
very dependent on this student, and when he or she was absent (for instance, due to illness) there were problems with
finding a replacement. Typically nobody wanted to volunteer and someone was forced to take the responsibility. This
person often lacked the skills of using the equipment, which affected the quality of interaction.

Coordination breakdowns at the teacher's site
In face-to-face classrooms    instructors develop skills of coordinating     and delivering  a lecture        with the  use of familiar
artifacts. In a videoconference studio these skills are often not applicable. Teachers have to change their practices to adjust
them to a different context featuring different kinds of technical artifacts. Empirical data obtained in our study allow to
differentiate between three types of coordination activities in a video session: (1) coordination related to course content, (2)
coordination related to teacher's presentation (the outgoing image), and (3) coordination related to students' activities (the
incoming image) (Hedestig, Kaptelinin, 2001).
Coordination related to course content. Teachers had to prepare to videoconference sessions much more carefully than to
traditional classes. Most of the teachers we interviewed were aware that videoconference-based teaching is much more
intensive and it was impossible to just copy a two-hour face-to-face lecture to a two-hour videoconference session. In their
preparation teachers produced special materials suitable for the media: slides of different style, handouts to be distributed in
advance, time schedules, storyboards, etc. Teachers' preparation phase was based on a very structured plan of a session.
During a session   teachers   would often   realize that their plans     did not take into   consideration         the complexity  and
heterogeneity in the setting. Videoconference sessions are very situated because the frequency of technological breakdowns
is still rather high and time schedule is rarely followed. It is not unusual that starting time and estimated breaks were
delayed by 5-20 minutes (see Table 1). For a teacher the consequence of those delays could imply significant changes of the
original plan of a lecture.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                   page 183

                  Video-        Planned              Real       Planned    Real break.  Difference.
                  session       starting           starting     break,        min          min
                                 time                time        min
                    1            10.15              10.23          15          21      +14 (8+6)
                    2            9.00                9.11          15          22      +18 (11+7)
                    3            13.15              13.20          10          18      +13 (5+8)
                    4            8.15                8.16          15          25      +11 (1+10)
                    5            10.00              10.10          15          19      +14 (10+4)
                    6            10.15              10.25          -            -      +10
              Table 1. Examples of differences between planned and actual timing of videoconference sessions
Coordination of the outgoing image. When teachers act according to pre-planned content they have to concentrate on
monitor(s) showing the outgoing image. Since the setting requires high concentration of both students and teachers it is
common that the view is being changed from time to time, so that students do not look at slides only during the whole
session. Actions involved in this sequence include zooming documents or images on document camera, showing slides or
computer applications, showing the teacher or an area of the whiteboard, etc. These actions take place rather often, up to
once in every second minute (see Tables 2 and 3). Usually technicians are responsible for those actions, but sometimes the
responsibility lies solely on the teacher.

                                 Descrption                 S1  S2    S3  S4   S5
                                 Lecture time (min)         56  83    84  69   91
                                 Change video               0    0    0    0   0
                                 source
                                 Zooming                    5   10    8    5   10
                                 Camera                     10  34    55  51   67
                                 movements
                                 Audio adjustments          2    0    0    2   2
                Table 2. Examples of sessions (S1-S5) when the teacher uses a regular whiteboard
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 184

                                 Description            S1   S2   S3     S4    S5     S6
                                 Lecture time (min)     73   45   44     47    47     103
                                 Change video           43   29   26     23    13     80
                                 source
                                 Zooming                2     0    0     0      4     11
                                 Camera                 0     0    0     0      0     1
                                 movements
                                 Audio adjustments      0     1    1     1      2     9
                Table 3. Example of sessions (S1-S6) when the teacher uses slides on the document camera

Coordination    of the  incoming image.   Sessions become    even more   difficult to coordinate  when     the teacher has   to
concentrate  on reactions and  responses of the students.  The  teacher has to  discover  verbal and     non-verbal cues from
students by viewing the monitor for the incoming image, which often resulted in communication breakdowns (see Table 4).

              User-User breakdown               S1      S2   S3   S4    S5     S6     S7    S8     S9       S10
              Turntaking breakdowns              0      3    2    12     6      7     4      2      3       18
              Lack of feedback                  17      2    2    0      0      6     1      5      4        0
              Understanding problems             1      4    1    1      0      1     1      0      2        3
                            Table 4. Examples of sessions (S1-S10) with communication breakdowns.

A consequence of the above problems was that coordination of a session became very complicated, especially in cases of
"multipoint" sessions, when more than two studios were involved. It was not uncommon that teachers focused exclusively
on the content, paying no attention to the audience and leaving most of coordination to the facilitator.

Coordination among actors at teacher's sites: interaction between the teacher and the facilitator
Teachers were   usually helped by a technician/facilitator, whose  role greatly depended   on  the format    of a   session. In
situations when lectures was delivered from a video studio*, the goal of the facilitator was to help the teacher and control
incoming and outgoing images. Actions carried out by the facilitator included changing camera angles, zooming, switching
between different sources, and adjustment of the audio.
Most interactions between the teacher and the facilitator were based on non-verbal cues, such as eye contact, gestures, and
other kinds of signs. The facilitator had also an eye on the students' site and could give signals to the teacher if something
would go wrong. In fact, the facilitator became more of a teacher assistant by sharing the responsibility of coordinating
activities among the participants. This support was especially important for the teachers because for many of them teaching
in a videoconference environment was a new experience and they had to develop new work practices (Hedestig, 2000).

Upwards contextualization: Breakdowns originating from outside the setting
Activities within a videoconference session could also be affected by external factors. In our study we have focussed on
some interdependencies between videoconference settings and the broader context, which affected teaching and learning in
the setting.

Coordination breakdowns across intra-organizational boundaries
A three-year program at the University can consist of up to 15-20 courses involving departments across different faculties.
Different departments have different work practices, different competencies in technology use, and different organizational

* Lectures typically fell into one of the following categories: (a) lectures based on the use of the whiteboard, (b) lectures
 based on PowerPoint slides, and (c) "technology intensive" lectures, in which the whole range of available technology
 was used, including electronic whiteboards and various computer applications.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                     page  185

structures, which are difficult to integrate. Coordination of these organizational units of the University is often problematic,
which can be illustrated by following examples:

1.   Teacher X planned a videoconference session to take place two weeks after his course started. The day before the session students
     contacted him and informed that it was impossible for them to participate in the session because another teacher (Y), who taught the
     previous course, scheduled an examination on the same day. Teacher X called the department in charge of the previous course but
     none there could help him. Teacher X got the name of teacher Y from the students and tried to contact him, but teacher X was out of
     town. The video session had to be cancelled.
2.   A teacher  was  planning a  discussion seminar   during     a video session. He asked the course administrator    (who  was also  a
     webmaster) to put a list of questions on the web, so that students could prepare for the discussion. The administrator made a
     mistake and placed the questions to the `Exercises", not the "Discussions" section. The students misinterpreted the aim of the
     session and when the teacher tried to initiate a discussion they refused to participate, claiming they were unprepared. The teacher
     had to cancel the discussion and deliver a lecture instead.

Decentralized education courses at the University are usually conducted by teacher teams working with both on-campus
and distant students. For many departments functioning of teacher teams is associated with serious coordination problems
since participating teachers are always on the road. They become a "virtual team" and have difficulties in coordinating their
activities within the group, as well. Constantly traveling to off-campus sites teachers cannot easily meet and keep each
other updated on a day-to-day basis. Besides, they experience coordination problems with students. For instance, they have
difficulties with answering students' questions when these questions refer to lectures given by other teachers.

Coordination breakdowns across inter-organizational boundaries
Distance and decentralized education usually involve several organizations, which often have different structures, cultures,
communication patterns etc. Collaboration and communication between those actors can be easily disrupted by actors who
do not share the same common ground or perspectives. The complicated nature of coordination required to solve the most
trivial problems when an inter-organizational cooperation is involved, can be illustrated with a simple example of room
reservation. When teachers planned a videoconference session, they had to make reservation for a room/studio both in a
study center and on campus. This reservation procedure could take days to accomplish. The problem was caused by the
need to coordinate several organizational actors, each working with its own reservation system. Reservation systems were
not integrated with each other and nobody had a full control over the status of all video studios. If a site were occupied
during the time a teacher planned to use it, a negotiation procedure would occur were either the teacher or administrative
personal would try to find a solution. Coordination breakdowns resulted from this included the following ones:
     ·      Students occasionally did not turn up because they were not notified of changes. Also, students would arrive to a site when the
         videoconference classroom was closed because study center personnel were not informed about the reservation.
     ·      Sometimes teachers made reservations with "wrong" people, that is, those who were not actually responsible for reservations.
         At some study center reservations was made by an administrator, at others by a technician. In our interviews with teachers it
         turned  out that some  of them made      reservations   with  technicians and these  reservations were  later   on cancelled by
         administrators, who did not even inform the teachers on the grounds that the teachers did not follow the correct procedure.
     ·      When teachers made room reservations they did not know exactly what equipment was available in the room. Sometimes they
         would discover that crucial equipment did not exist there and it was impossible to conduct a lecture as planned.
     ·      Study center personnel could not make any reservation for an external organization wanting to rent a video studio (which
         could potentially be very profitable for the center) because teachers always made reservations in short notice.
A distinctive feature of decentralized education in our study was a complicated system of dependencies between different
organizations: the University with its faculties and departments, local authorities, and companies running local educational
facilities.
This  lack   of coordination  between the    above    stakeholders    was   a major    source of actual    and potential    breakdowns.
Videoconference settings for decentralized education can be considered boundary objects that create new challenges for all
institutional actors. In particular, they make especially evident the obstacles to coordination that still exist in organizations.
For instance, most information and decision support systems at the University had been developed and implemented within
the University, which means that external actors cannot access this information. To make inter-organizational cooperation
work,  new    informal ways   of coordination     and communication        between   organizations have     emerged,     and these new
communication patterns evolved on an operational level and often exist without being noticed by those working on strategic
levels. The complex interactions between various "players", which compose organizational context influencing teaching
and learning in videoconference settings at the University, are summarized in Figure 2.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                     page    186

                          University                                                             LOCAL
                                                                                                 GOVERNMENT

               Faculty

        Department                                               Web

      administration
                                                               materials:
                                                            handouts, exam
                                                            papers, grades,
                                                                  ...
         webmaster

                                     administration, technical
                                      support, facilitation
         teachers                                                                                STUDY CENTER
                                                                                                     administration,
           T1                                                                                       technical support
                                        Videoconf.                        students'
                                          studio                           classroo
                                                                             m
           T2                             Teacher

                                    videoconference-based learning environment
                                                                                                   library,
           T3                                                                                      equipment,
                                                                                                   computer      labs,

Figure  2.   A simplified model    of the organizational        context   of videoconference-based      learning  environment    at  the
University

GENERAL DISCUSSION
Traditional classroom education is a well-established genre with a long history that goes back for centuries. The evolution
of this genre has resulted in strategies, tools, and environments that provide a basis for smooth functioning of the system as
a whole.   Decentralized  education   implemented   through       videoconferences     is a relatively  new   genre.  As a   result, the
participants may  have   conflicting  expectations, such       as teachers   considering   it as  something   very   similar to regular
classrooms and students seeing it as a type of TV-broadcast.
Strategies and methods developed within traditional education are not necessarily applicable to videoconference settings.
While in regular classrooms teachers can draw students' attention to key contents by using subtle cues, perhaps even
without being   aware of  that, in videoconference   settings     teachers   and    facilitators should carry out  special,  sometimes
complex actions to direct students' attention to relevant information. In a way, teachers should acquire competences similar
to those of film directors. Interaction with students is also quite different in videoconference settings; it requires new
communication skills. Besides, in videoconference settings teachers have more limited possibilities to monitor the audience
and they have to develop the ability to use available cues for getting appropriate feedback. Finally, the possibility to
monitor the outgoing image (that is, to observe himself or herself "from the outside"), time management, and the need to
coordinate activities in the setting with the technician/facilitator also present new challenges to the teacher.
Success or failure of videoconference sessions critically depend on appropriate infrastructure, that is whether the students
are informed   about  the  schedule   and  assignments,        whether    a  room    and  equipment     are available,  etc. During    a
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page     187

videoconference session the teacher and students may look like being together in a "virtual classroom" but in fact they are
separated not only by physical distance but by institutional boundaries, as well. Facilities used by the teacher and the
students are often provided and maintained by different organizations. An extensive coordination work carried out by
various actors from different organizations (such as teachers, managers, technical support people, webmasters, secretaries,
etc.) is needed to combine the above facilities into integrated learning environments. In decentralized education teachers
and students have to deal with multiple and not always compatible organizational policies, routines, and requirements.
Therefore, educational practices need to be contextualized in a larger organizational and inter-organizational context.
To sum up, coordination mechanisms and structures developed at various levels of traditional education often fail in new
learning  environments. Spatial  and  organizational   boundaries cause communication   breakdowns    both in   information
exchange between the sites and inter-organizational cooperation necessary to create and maintain a setting. There is a need
for "re-contextualization", that is, development    and implementation  of new   coordination structures and  mechanisms
appropriate for new learning environments.
The study reported in this paper was primarily informed by activity theory. Following the basic principles of this approach,
we focused on actors and their goals, conflicts, mediation, and development. This approach provided support in discovering
breakdowns in activities we observed, and it can be concluded that activity theory can be a fruitful approach at an early
exploratory phase  for identifying   key issues and  concerns. In our future research we  plan  to use activity theory    for
developing more detailed representations of actual activities in videoconference settings. Representations of that kind could
help take a next step in our analysis and provide a basis for understanding emerging practices that deal with the breakdowns
described in this paper. Besides, such representations can potentially reveal new and advanced uses of technology that go
beyond traditional education and allow accomplishing new goals.
Finally, even though in this paper we do not discuss design implications of our findings, we believe the findings do have
direct implications for design of videoconference-based environments. This issue, however, requires a special treatment. In
our view, there is a need to go beyond tool-centered perspective to a practice/activity-centered perspective not only in
analysis but in design, as well. System design should be embedded into and subordinated to interaction design, which, in
turn, should be embedded into design of educational activities mediated by technology. Such an arrangement could provide
a meta-framework    for interdisciplinary  cooperation   between,  respectively, software engineering,   Human-Computer
Interaction, and Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, and assure the most efficient use of social science insights
in supporting education with new tools, systems, and environments.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The study reported in this paper has been conducted within a research project funded by The Bank of Sweden Tercentenary
Foundation.

REFERENCES
Abbot, L., Dallat, J., Livingston, R., Robinson, A. (1993) Videoconferencing and Distance Learning. Faculty of Education
         and Department of Adult and Continuing Education, University of Ulster.
Cunningham S et al. (1998) New media and Borderless Education: A review of the Convergence between Global Media
         Networks  and  Higher   Education  Provision,  Australian Government,    Department  of Employment,    Education,
         training and Youth Affairs, Evaluations and Investigations Program, Higher Education Division. (http://www.
         deetya.gov.au/highered/eippubs/eip97-22/eip9722.pdf
Crowston, K., Osborn C. (1998) A coordination theory approach to process description and redesign. CCS wp No 204,
         Center for Coordination Science, MIT.
Dallat, J., Fraser, G., Livingston, R., Robinson, A. (1992). Videoconferencing and the Adult Learner. Faculty of Education
         and Department of Adult and Continuing Education, University of Ulster.
Esbjörnsson, M. (1997). Förutsättningar för den distribuerade utbildningen. Den fysiska och virtuella miljöns påverkan på
         inlärningsprocessen. Department of Informatics, No 97.14, Umea University.
Hedestig, U., Kaptelinin, V (2001). Teachers work practice in videoconference settings - Implications for design of virtual
         learning environments.   In  Proceedings   of 20th World  Conference on   Open   and Distance  Education,      ICDE,
         Dusseldorf, Germany.
Hedestig, U. (2000).   Facilitators  dolda expertis i  videokonferens - Konsekvenser  för  design  av virtuella lärmiljöer.
         Department of Informatics, Umeå University, Sweden.
Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the wild. Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Kaptelinin, V., Cole, M (1997). Individual and collective activities in educational computer game playing. In: Proceedings
         of the International CSCL'97 Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning Toronto, Canada.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page 188

Kaptelinin, V., Nardi, B., Macaulay, C. (1999). Structuring the "space" of context: The Activity Checklist. interactions, vol.
       VI.4, July/August 1999.
Kaptelinin, V. (1996) Computer-mediated activity: Functional organs in social and developmental contexts. In: Nardi, B.
       (ed.) Context and Consciousness: Activity Theory and Human-Computer Interaction. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT
       Press.
Koschmann,  T. (1996)  (ed.) CSCL:  Theory and     practice of an emerging  paradigm. New   Jersey:    Lawrence  Erlbaum
       Associates, Publishers, Mahwah.
Lau, Linda (2000). Distance Learning Technologies: Issues, Trends and Opportunities. Idea group Publishing Hershey, US.
Leontiev, A. N. (1978) Activity. Consciousness. Personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Malone, T., Crowston, K. (1992): What is coordination theory and how can it help design cooperative work systems? In R
       Baecker (ed): Groupware and Computer Supported Cooperative Work. California: Morgan Kaufman.
Malone, T., Crowston, K. (1994) The Interdisciplinary Study of Coordination. In ACM Computing Surveys, 26, (1).
Mantovani, G.  (1996). New   Communication  Environments.      From Everyday  to Virtual. Taylor    &  Francis Publishers.
       London.
Nardi, B (1996) Studying Context: A Comparison of Activity Theory, Situated Action Models, and Distributed Cognition.
       In B. Nardi (ed) Context and Consciousness. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Rosengren, B.  (1993)  När-  och distansutbildning med dubbelriktad   bild- och  ljudkommunkation    - en fallbeskrivning.
       Department of Computer and System Sciences, report No 93-012-DSC, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
