Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page 199

F. (PEDAGOGY TRACK): COMPUTER SUPPORT FOR PROBLEM-BASED
LEARNING

    Collaborative Ways of Knowing: Issues in Facilitation
                                                    Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver
                                     Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
                                                    chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper describes a detailed analysis of a student-centered problem-based learning group. The focus of this analysis is to
understand    the goals and  strategies of    an expert  facilitator. This was   accomplished  by   examining   the questions   and
statements   that  the students and    facilitators generated  and    inferring the facilitator's goals and   strategies. Studying
facilitation in a face to face situation provides some guidance in designing support to use in an online problem-based
learning environment; however, considerable adaptation is necessary as some facilitation can be built into the system but
some facilitation may need to be done by a human tutor. Implications for CSCL system design for problem-based learning
will be discussed.

Keywords
Problem-based learning, facilitation, student-centered learning

INTRODUCTION
One of the hallmarks of a constructivist classroom is its focus on student-centered discourse (Palincsar, 1998). In a typical
teacher centered classroom, the teacher asks 95% of the questions; mostly requiring short answers (Graesser & Person,
1994). The typical mode of discourse is the IRE pattern in which the teacher initiates a question, generally aimed at getting
a student to display their knowledge, the student responds, and the teacher evaluates that response. Thus the goal often
focuses on having students learn facts. Teacher's strategies are influenced by their goals for teaching and beliefs about
learning (Schoenfeld, 1998). In contrast, inquiry teachers have goals that include having students learn the facts but their
goals go to higher levels as well. A study of inquiry teachers identified several different types of goals and strategies that
are used (Collins & Stevens, 1982). They found that inquiry teachers' goals include having students learn theories and how
the theories  are  derived.  Inquiry teachers    believe that it is   important for students  to  be active  agents in knowledge
construction. This includes having students learn what questions to ask, how to make predictions from theories, and how
theories and rules can be tested. Their analyses indicate that these teachers use different kinds of strategies to achieve these
goals. For   example,   they  may   select appropriate   cases   and   counterexamples  to   encourage  the  students  to  generate
hypotheses, make predictions, reveal their misconceptions, and test their ideas. In inquiry teaching, the students are more
active than in IRE discourse but the teacher still leads the discussion, working towards global learning goals but choosing
strategies on the fly.
Social constructivist approaches to learning are said to be student-centered, with students driving the discussion and the
teacher serving as the guide on the side (Palincsar, 1998). Determining exactly what that means and how student-centered
learning can be facilitated are important in being able to implement constructivist approaches more broadly. One way to
examine this is to analyze the goals, strategies, and tactics of a master facilitator. Understanding how an expert facilitates in
terms  of the  goals,  strategies, and tactics   that he uses has   important   implications for  training new  facilitators and in
designing CSCL systems. Examining group discourse in terms of who is asking questions, the nature of the questions
asked, and the nature of the responses can provide some insight into characteristics of a student-centered classroom. This
paper reports on a study of a specific student-centered learning environment, problem-based learning (PBL). PBL is widely
used in medical schools (Barrows, 1988; Schmidt et al, 1996). PBL is an example of a cognitive apprenticeship (Collins,
Brown, & Newman, 1989). In a cognitive apprenticeship, students learn in the context of solving complex, meaningful
tasks. The role of the teacher is to make key aspects of expertise visible and making tacit thinking processes explicit. In
PBL, students learn through solving problems and reflecting on their experience. They work in small groups guided by a
facilitator. The  role of the facilitator  is guiding   students on   the learning  process, pushing  them   to think  deeply,  and
modeling the kinds of questions that students need to be asking themselves. The collaborative groups provide a forum for
students to distribute the cognitive load and negotiate shared understanding as they solve the problem. This study analyzes
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                       page  200

the group  discourse  during    two   PBL  sessions    to better understand   the   learning process.  It focuses    on  the   interaction
between a master PBL facilitator and an experienced group of PBL students.1
A PBL tutorial session begins by presenting a group, typically 5-7 students with a small amount of information about a
complex problem (Barrows, 1988; Hmelo & Ferrari, 1997). From the outset, students question the facilitator to obtain
additional information; they may also gather facts by doing experiments or other research. At several points, students pause
to reflect on the data they have collected so far, generate questions about that data, and ideas about solutions. Students
identify concepts they need to learn more about to solve the problem (i.e., learning issues). After considering the case with
their existing knowledge, students divide up and independently research the learning issues they identified. They then
regroup to share what they learned, and reconsider their ideas in light of what they have learned. When completing the task,
they reflect on the problem to abstract the lessons learned, as well as how they performed in their self-directed learning and
collaborative problem solving. This helps prepare the students for transfer (Salomon, Perkins, & Globerson, 1989).
While working,     students use  whiteboards     to help  scaffold their problem     solving. The    whiteboard   is divided    into four
columns to help them record where they have been and where they are going. The columns help remind the learners of the
problem-solving process. The whiteboard serve as a focus for group deliberations. The Facts column holds information that
the students obtained from the problem statement. The Ideas column serves to keep track of their evolving hypotheses. The
students place their questions for further study into the Learning Issues column. They use the Action Plan column to keep
track of plans for resolving the problem.

METHODS
Data Sources
The  participants  in this  study   were   five second-year   medical   students,   who  were  experienced     in PBL,     and  a  master
facilitator. Students worked on a problem for five hours over two sessions. The sessions were videotaped and transcribed.
In  addition,  the researcher   reviewed   the  audiotapes  with   the  facilitator and  interviewed  him   regarding    his   goals  and
strategies for particular discourse moves.

Coding and Analysis
The entire transcript was coded for the types of questions and statements in the discourse. All the questions asked were
identified. They were coded using Graesser and Person's (1994) taxonomy of question types as well as several additional
categories that were developed to capture monitoring, clarification, and group dynamics questioning (see Table 1). Three
major categories of questions were coded. Short answer questions required simple answers of five types: verification,
disjunction, concept completion, feature specification, and quantification. Long answer questions required more elaborated
relational responses    of  nine    types: definitions,    examples,   comparisons,     interpretations,  causal   antecedent,      causal
consequences, expectational, judgmental, and enablement. The meta category referred to group dynamics, monitoring, self-
directed learning,   clarification-seeking  questions,    and requests   for  action.  Any    questions   that did   not   fit into  these
categories were classified as uncodeable.
Statements    were  coded   as  to  whether  they   were   new   ideas,  modifications   of   ideas, agreements,     disagreements,    or
metacognitive statements. Each of these statements was coded as to its depth. Statements were coded as simple if they were
assertions without any justification or elaboration. These corresponded to responses to the short answer questions. These
included   verifications, concept   completions,    and   quantities. Elaborated    statements went   beyond    simple     assertions by
including  definitions,   examples,   comparisons,   judgments,    and  predictions.  These   would   be  responses     to long   answer
question types 7-10, 14, and 15 in Table 1. Statements were coded as causal if they described the processes that lead to a
particular state or resulted from a particular event (i.e., responses to question types 11-13). Statements were also coded as to
whether  they   were  read  from   the case information,    repetitions  of a previous   statement,   or  uncodeable    statements.   An
independent rater coded ten percent of the discourse; interrater agreement of greater than 90% was achieved.

RESULTS
Questions and Statements
Students   were expected    to  ask a  substantial  number   of  questions.  The    meta questions   were  expected   to   be  the  major
category   for the facilitator. The   distribution  of questions  is  shown   in Figure  1.  Because   these   were  experienced     PBL
students, they were also expected to generate a substantial number of this type of question. A total of 809 questions were
asked, 466 by the students and 343 by the facilitator. The students asked 226 short answer questions, 51 long answer
questions, and 189 meta questions. Of the short answer questions, the modal question type was to elicit the features of the
patients' illness from the medical record, for example when Jim asked "Does it say anything about medications?"

1 As in the PBL literature, the terms tutor and facilitator are used interchangeably in this paper.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 201

                                           Table 1. Categories of questions

Question Type            Description                                        Example
Short answer
   Verification          Yes/no responses to factual questions.             Are   headaches   associated    with  high
                                                                            blood pressure?

   Disjunctive           Questions    that require   a  simple    decision  Is it all the toes? Or just the great toe?
                         between two alternatives
   Concept               Filling  in  the  blank  or   the  details of  a   What  supplies  the  bottom   of the feet?
   completion            definition                                         Where does that come from??
   Feature               Determines qualitative attributes of an object     Could we get a general appearance and
   specification         or situation                                       vital signs?
   Quantification        Determines    quantitative    attributes  of  an   How many lymphocytes does she have?
                         object or situation
Long Answer
   Definition.           Determine meaning of a concept                     What    do    you    guys   know     about
                                                                            pernicious anemia as a disease?
   Example:              Request  for  instance of a   particular concept   When have we seen this kind of patient
                         or event type                                      before?
   Comparison            Identify similarities and   differences  between   Are there any more proximal lesions that
                         two or more objects                                could cause    this? I mean   I  know      its
                                                                            bilateral.
   Interpretation        A description of what can be inferred from a       You guys want to tell me what you saw
                         pattern of data                                    in the peripheral smear?
   Causal antecedent     Asks for an explanation of what state or event     What    do    you    guys   know     about
                         causally led to the current state and why          compression    leading to  numbness    and
                                                                            tingling? How that happens?
   Causal                Asks for an explanation of the consequences        What happens when it's, when the, when
   consequence           of an event of state                               the neuron's demyelinated?

   Enablement:           Asks for an explanation of the object, agent,      How   does   uhm  involvement    of  veins
                         or processes  that   allows some   action  to be   produce numbness in the foot?
                         performed.
   Expectational         Asks    about    expectations   or  predictions    How much, how much better is her, are
                         (including violation of expectations)              her neural signs expected to get?
   Judgmental:           Asks about value placed on an idea, advice,        Should we put her to that trouble, do you
                         or plan                                            feel, on the basis of what your thinking
                                                                            is?
Task oriented and meta
   Group dynamics:       Lead    to   discussions    of    consensus   or   So  Mary,   do you   know  what   they     are
                         negotiation of how group should proceed            talking about?
   Monitoring            Help check on progress, requests for planning      Um, so what did you want to do next?
   Self-directed         Relate to defining learning issues, who found      So might that be a learning issue we can,
   learning              what information;                                  we can take a look at?
   Need clarification    The  speaker  does   not understand  something     Are  you,  are you,  Jeff are you  talking
                         and needs further explanation or confirmation      about micro vascular damage that then,
                         of previous statement                              which then causes the neuropathy?
   Request/ Directive    Request for action related to PBL process          Why don't you give, why don't you give
                                                                            Jeff a chance to get the board up.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                                                                   page    202

The facilitator asked 39 short answer questions, 48 long answer questions and 256 meta questions. Short answer questions
were often used to focus students' attention.
Long answer questions often asked the students to define what they had said or interpret information as for example when
the facilitator asked a student "But I mean what produces the numbness at the bottom of the feet?" Meta questions were the
dominant     mode  for the facilitator                                                       as he  asked the  students          to evaluate  one of their hypotheses                                   "Well  yeah,         multiple
sclerosis. How about that? How do you feel about that?..." These statements also included monitoring the group dynamics
as he asked "So Mary, do you know what they are talking about?" The facilitator asked comparatively few content-focused
questions. The distribution of question types differed for the facilitator and the students.

        140

        120

        100

          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Students
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Facilitator
          60

          40

          20

           0

                                                                                                                Question type

                                                                                                Figure 6. Distribution of question types

If the discussions were student-centered then it is reasonable to expect the students to do most of the talking. Moreover, if
knowledge were being collaboratively constructed, the students' statements should be in response to previously introduced
ideas. The facilitator should be offering few new ideas and making statements that are in the metacognitive category,
centered around monitoring the groups progress in problem-solving and self-directed learning.
This was indeed the case. The facilitator made a total of 243 statements and the students made a total of 3763 statements.
The   distribution of  statement types                                                          is shown  in Figure           2. Clearly, the students are  doing most                                    of the          talking. The
distribution of statement types differed among the students and the facilitator. The facilitator made very few statements,
rarely offering new ideas or modifying existing ideas. The facilitator was most likely to offer a comment monitoring the
group's progress or encouraging students to consider that a poorly elaborated idea might become a learning issue. Both the
metacognitive questioning and statements helped support the students collaborative knowledge construction as they build
on the new ideas offered by others, expressing agreement, disagreement, and modifying the ideas being discussed. Of the
first 4 categories  of  statements,                                                         the majority  were simple            statements  (1641)  but the students                                   also made          elaborated
statements (464) and causal explanations (211).
       FeCatounrceeQpstpuVceaDieocnirstfijDiifmfiieucfpccilnaatacenittittiiitioiovoononennn
                                             RNeeqeuIGderntsoCCtel,EuJCroEAaUxpuoMpnrnnDnirpidtosfdcarimeegeEnetyciboepclcxtqatnamcdatteaetouiraiiaeeirtdieoivomnmsamteSnnnoieneopblanlgccnDlnnteteeL
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                 page 203

      1400

      1200

      1000

        800

                                                                                                                                             Students
                                                                                                                                             Facilitator

        600

        400

        200

          0
                     New Ideas              Modification              Agreement              Disgreement             Metacognitive
                                                                  Statement type

                                           Figure 7. Distribution of statement types

While many of the statements taken individually were simple statements, taken as a collaborative explanation, they were
elaborated,   over several      speakers and several         conversational       turns as occurred        in this sequence         after Barrows         ask  the
students how the pernicious anemia hypothesis accounts for their concerns.
            HB: Mary does that malnutrition vitamin B cover the, the things you were talking about just a minute ago? You
            were concerned about there's a number of different vitamins that may be involved.
            MA: I hmmm.
            HB: Can we just leave the, that hypothesis up?
            MA: Oh yes. I think that's fine.
            DE: Like pernicious anemia is a big one.
            MA: Right. That must be the vitamin, the B.
            HB: What, what's pernicious anemia?
            DE: Uh, it's a deficient, deficiency of cobalamine.
            MA: Vitamin B12, cobalamine or...
            JM: Or folate.
            MA: Or folate.
            DE: Yeah, but it's not, that's not pernicious anemia. That's a, also another macrocytic anemia.
            MA: Pernicious anemia is specifically.
            JM: Oh. You're right. That's right.
            DE: And um, you get anemia and you can also get eh, um, peripheral...
            MA: Neuropathies.
            DE: ... neuropathies.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  204

       HB: down there too?
       CP: Technically pernicious, pernicious anemia is technically just the loss, the lack of intrinsic factor.
       DE: The loss of intrinsic factor. So you don't absorb.
       CP: And that's [unintelligible]
       DE: You don't absorb.
       CP: Right.
       MA: Right. That's a good distinction. You see, we just...
       CP: As opposed to like somebody who had part of their intestine removed and can't absorb.
       MA: Right.
       CP: But their ileum is gone and they can't absorb the B12. That's different than pernicious anemia.to vit, intrinsic
       factor.
This is collaborative because students all contributed different parts of the explanation. Barrows triggered the explanation
but then different students offered different pieces of the explanation about pernicious anemia, what some signs might be
(neuropathies) and what alternative explanations they can rule out (poor absorption of B12 in the gut). The students were
themselves very metacognitive as they monitored their progress and understanding and considered their need for self-
directed learning.

Goals and strategies
The fine-grained   analysis provides useful  descriptive information about     the PBL  tutorial. This is complemented     by  a
qualitative analysis of the goals and strategies of the facilitator using a stimulated recall. The facilitator (Barrows) was
interviewed on his   goals  and strategies while viewing    the videotape.  In  addition, an interaction  analysis session was
conducted with a cognitive scientist to further elucidate the data interpretation.
The facilitator's overall goal emphasized that students needed to construct a causal explanation of how a disease leads to a
particular pattern of signs and symptoms. He believed that students learned best through guided exploration of complex, ill-
structured problem spaces. He focused on helping students become good reasoners as they looked for consistent mappings
between different levels of explanations. Another important goal was helping the students become critical, self-directed
learners who are cognizant of the limitations of their knowledge. His overall strategy was to use open-ended questioning
and take advantage of the PBL routine.
One specific strategy that the facilitator frequently used was to push students for an explanation as he did in the example
below when MA throws out the idea of multiple sclerosis as the cause of the patient's problem:
       MA: Um, just given the idea that numbness in your feet, I had multiple sclerosis as a possibility. She is an older
       woman       and multiple sclerosis, I believe,  usually  presents in the younger   generation 30's  and 40's,  but  it, it
       definitely can happen in an older person. So...
       Facilitator: And tell us what multiple sclerosis is.
       MA: Um, Multiple sclerosis is um, a progressive, it's a progressive and chronic debilitating disease um, where you
       get various points of sclerosis within the brain itself and it can affect different areas of um, of um, people's motor
       function. And it's called multiple sclerosis because there are multiple areas of these sclerotic plaques that occur in
       the brain.
       Facilitator: What causes those plaques?
This serves the goal of placing the students' knowledge in public view and helping the students see the limitations of their
understanding. Another strategy observed is that of revoicing (O'Connor & Micheals, 1993) in which the facilitator restates
what a students has said.
       MA: And another important um, hypothesis that's come is a vitamin B12 deficiency, which we've crossed out.
       Hah, because we didn't think she had any malnutrition. However, we found out that um, in the elderly there is a
       much, much higher prevalence of Vitamin B12 deficiency...
       DE: And also I was just, happen to glance at it last night and um, 'cause I was just talking with my husband and,
       about the um, neurosyphilis and, and uh, the olivopontocereballer atrophy being pretty serious and progressive
       and, and I was thinking that vitamin B12 wasn't so much if you treated it. But it, I was reading that it's in a lot of
       the neur, uh, neural deficits are irreversible.
       MA: Uh hmm.
       DE: So it is, you know. It does put in my mind it's a more of a serious.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 205

         Facilitator: Now you people are saying B12 all the time and yet when you say we eliminated it, you're talking
         about pernicious anemia, right?
The facilitator has accomplished three goals here. First, he has taken the idea put forth by the students and clarified it for
the group as he restated it. Second, he has legitimated DE's idea. She is a quiet but extremely thoughtful student and she is
recognized in this move. Third, he made sure this very important idea did not get lost. Pernicious anemia is the cause of the
patients' problem and was in danger of being lost from the discussion. Table 2 provides a sample of some of the additional
strategies that served as useful facilitation tools.
This study demonstrates that, in PBL, the students do a substantial amount of question-asking and explanation construction
indicating that the tutorials are clearly student-centered. Moreover, the teacher's role is that of metacognitive guidance and
scaffolding the collaboration. Specific types of questions are strategically used in the service of learning goals. These
questions serve as scaffolds that are faded as students internalize the questions (Hmelo & Guzdial, 1996). These results
suggest that through this cognitive apprenticeship, students see the big picture and integrate large bodies of learning and are
becoming socialized into their community of practice through their learning discourse.

                                    Table 2. A sampler of additional strategies

Strategy                                               Goals
Summarizing                                            Ensure joint representation of problem
                                                       Establish common ground
                                                       Help students synthesize data
                                                       Move group along in process
Map between symptoms and hypothesis                    Elaborate causal mechanism
Generate/ evaluate hypotheses                          Help students focus their inquiry
                                                       Examine fit between hypotheses and accumulating evidence
Check that students agree that whiteboard              Make sure all ideas get recorded and important ideas are not
reflects their discussion                              lost
Cleaning up the board                                  Evaluate idea
                                                       Maintain focus
                                                       Keep process moving
Creating learning issues                               Knowledge gaps as opportunities to learn
Encourage construction of visual representation        Construct integrated knowledge that ties mechanisms to effects

APPLYING THE LESSONS LEARNED TO ONLINE FACILITATION
The analysis of an expert facilitator has important implications for providing tools for facilitating online collaboration as
well as providing a basis for training novice facilitators in PBL. These results provide suggestions for conversational moves
that facilitators might make and representations that could embody the learning goals and strategies that an expert facilitator
uses. There are other issues that this analysis does not address as well--for example, how does facilitation need to differ
between synchronous and asynchronous environments.
The role of the facilitator in a face-to-face discussion has several aspects. First, the facilitator needs to help maintain the
agenda and manage time. Second, the facilitator needs to ensure that ideas are addressed at a deep, conceptual level. Third,
the facilitator needs to  keep the group  moving       and  ensure that everyone participates. These roles are critical in an
asynchronous facilitation but enacting them will have some qualitative differences. In face-to-face tutorials, it is critical to
get to the learning issues before a session ends. Session boundaries are not always clear in online PBL. Online systems need
to consider timeframes and embedded activity structures for accomplishing PBL activities to create these boundaries. It is
more difficult to keep an online group moving without the visual cues available in face-to-face interaction. Finally, it is
likely that the facilitator has an additional role in asynchronous PBL ­helping the group to converge rather than continuing
to diverge. Understanding how to address these differences is critical in developing systems to support both students and
tutors in asynchronous discussion.
PBL provides a well-described approach to constructivist learning however it is labor intensive and requires one trained
facilitator for each group of students, which is not always practical. Often novices are asked to facilitate with very limited
training. Research by Derry, Seymour, Steinkuehler, and Lee (2000) suggests that facilitation is quite difficult for novices.
Novice tutors may not always know how and when to intervene appropriately. In the novice tutors' struggle to facilitate,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         page 206

they may be overly directive as they try to guide the group's agenda and have difficulty dealing with the group dynamics.
The questions that the expert asks can be incorporated as procedural facilitations for the novice tutor by providing hints that
suggest different questions that might be useful to serve different goals in different stages of learning. The analysis of the
questions asked has been incorporated into a set of procedural facilitations for student tutors in an Educational Psychology
class for preservice teachers. Figure 3 shows an example of one of the four prompt cards that a novice facilitator might use
during hypothesis generation. These types of hints might be incorporated into an online tutor tool kit. As well, annotated
examples of discourse could be provided to model how and when expert facilitators intervene and when they stand back
and allow the group to work issues out among themselves. Although this includes very basic information about PBL, it
provides concrete examples of questions that the facilitator could ask.
2) GENERATING MULTIPLE HYPOTHESES

Students should brainstorm their first instincts about:
IDEAS: how to solve the problem
FACTS: information we know about the problem and from their own knowledge
LEARNING ISSUES: information we need to know
ACTIONS: what we can do to start solving the problem
The scribe will begin to write down what the group says on the white board/ big paper.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ask for clarification of terms written down in the FACTS and IDEAS columns.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A sk   of cr lar fi atc oi  no  tf rme s  w rti en od w in    n  het F  CA T aS nd DI E  SA c ol mu ns .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EX A M LP E S:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ·  hW at  od  se  th  ta et rm m ae   ?n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W· h   ta od  se  "e  px re t"  em na ni th si ac   se ?

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     If tus de tn cs  an t'  lac ifr yo r  efd in te eh ir ed s, a ht es  be ce om e EL A  RN NI G IS US E  S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EXAMPLES:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               · What does that term mean?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     · What does "expert" mean in this case?
      If students can't clarify or define their ideas, these become LEARNING ISSUES

Goal: To help students understand what they don't know.

Figure 3. Example prompt card for facilitators

If trained facilitators are a limited resource, then a distributed PBL system might offer an alternative way to deal with this
limitation (Steinkuehler et al., in press). As noted in the previous section, the analysis of expert facilitation can be used to
provide tools to support novices in tutoring. Asynchronous collaboration might offer opportunities for students to be more
reflective than they might be in a face-to-face conversation, enabling deeper learning conversations. However, the slower
pace of asynchronous PBL might make some of the strategies described above difficult to implement. The slower pace
gives the facilitator more time to respond to issues going on in the group but there is a real danger that the flow of the
dialogue might be lost. In the face-to-face tutorial, the students made 3763 statements and asked 454 questions. Online,
students take many fewer turns and there are significant time lags in students' responses. This suggests that there needs to
be some                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       adaptation to accomplish PBL  asynchronously. A pilot  study was  conducted   in Spring 2001  with 2 groups
experienced in face-to-face PBL using the STEP PBL system.2 The STEP PBL system is an innovative web site designed to
support facilitated problem-based discussions of video-cases (Derry et al., 2001). The site has a student module which helps
structure the students collaborative PBL, a tutor toolkit to provide resources for facilitation, an asynchronous environment
for online collaboration, video case materials, and hypermedia information resources that cover learning sciences content.
The student                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      module  included a whiteboard, as in traditional PBL  and the asynchronous    environment was a threaded
discussion, For the pilot study, an experienced tutor facilitated the groups. Students would log on at different times and at
irregular intervals. This posed a major challenge when the facilitator would ask a student to explain what they meant and
the student might not log on for several days by which time the conversation was on another topic. As in other CSCL
systems, the responses to students' posts and whiteboard entries need to be flagged so students can respond. One possible
solution to this problem would be to have the system email the participants (including the facilitator) whenever there is a
new post to remind them to log in. Because of the nature of threaded discussions, there need to be mechanisms that make
the flow of the online discussions more transparent to the participants.

2 STEP website: http://www.wcer.edu/step
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page    207

A CSCL system adapted for online PBL needs to have representations that support problem-based discourse. One way to
accomplish this might be through anchored collaboration (Hmelo, Guzdial, & Turns, 1998) in which the whiteboard serves
as an anchor for conversations. There needs to be a mechanism for the facilitator and other students to negotiate and discuss
the contents of the whiteboards in an integrated fashion. Pilot work with the STEP PBL system suggests that integration of
disparate workspaces is critical in distributing some of the facilitation onto the system and in maintaining the flow of the
PBL tutorial session. A more integrated system might contain links and annotations that connect the discussion space to the
whiteboard space.
Representations can also embody the goals of PBL. Consider the general goal of the facilitator to help students construct
causal explanations that connect theories, data, and proposed solutions. Representational tools constrain student discourse
to the extent that they support these goals--for example, a concept-mapping tool could support the construction of causal
explanations to the extent that it is salient that students need to tie problems to solutions (Suthers, 2001). For example, the
representation might emphasize what students need to observe in the problem (e.g., teachers goals, activity structures,
assessments). Other visual representations might support other goals. It is critical that the various workspaces be integrated
such that students map among the spaces, i.e., the whiteboard, asynchronous discussion, and other visual representations.
The sequence of activities is another way of offloading some of the facilitation task onto a system. Some of the expert
facilitation strategies discussed above can be incorporated into the sequence of activities structured by the system. Students
might be asked to generate summaries after some period of time and to compare their summaries and negotiate a joint
summary of their problem representation and solution to date. The system might ask the students to update their hypothesis
list whenever they log onto the system and ask them to explain why they are modifying their ideas as the expert facilitator
does at regular intervals. As they are getting ready to log off, the system could have students compile a list of the learning
issues they plan to research before the next time they log in. They might identify the resources that they used. This
information could then be passed onto the facilitator as well as being posted to the group whiteboard as well as supporting
the appropriate student activities.

CONCLUSIONS
Analysis of expert facilitation provides many valuable insights into what it means to do constructivist teaching. These
insights fall into four categories. The first set of issues relate to how facilitators with varying levels of expertise can be
trained and supported to be more like experts. The second is to provide guidance to offload facilitation functions onto an
asynchronous PBL system. The third issue relates to embodying the goals and strategies of the expert facilitator into the
visual representations that are available in the system. The fourth issue addresses how facilitating asynchronous and face-
to-face discussions differ. These ideas for system design are hypotheses that need to be systematically tested to understand
how  PBL  and  other constructivist    instructional models  can be implemented     to support   productive discourse. Similar
analyses need  to be conducted      of online facilitation to understand    what it means  to  be an expert   facilitator in an
asynchronous environment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research  was funded by a      National  Academy    of   Education/   Spencer  Postdoctoral Fellowship.  I am  especially
appreciative of the assistance of Howard Barrows for being the subject of this data analysis and contributing to an ongoing
discussion of these data and to Allan Collins for his assistance in data analysis. I also thank Sharon Derry, Constance
Steinkuehler, and Matt DelMarcelle for the opportunity to apply the lessons learned in a preliminary attempt at online PBL.
I think Uravi Trivedi for her tireless coding of the tutorial discourse.

REFERENCES
Barrows, H. (1988). The tutorial process. Springfield IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing, and
         mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp.
         453-494). Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Collins, A. & Stevens, A. (1982). Goals and strategies of inquiry teachers. In R. Glaser (Ed.). Advances in instructional
         psychology. pp. 65-119. Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Derry, S. J., Seymour, J., Steinkuehler, C., & Lee, J. (2001, April). From ambitious vision to partially satisfying reality: An
         evolving socio-technical design supporting community and collaborative learning in teacher education. Paper
         presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association. Seattle, WA.
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. (1994). Question asking during tutoring. American Educational Research Journal, 31, 104-
         137.
Hmelo, C. E., & Ferrari, M. (1997). The problem-based learning tutorial: Cultivating higher-order thinking skills. Journal
         for the Education of the Gifted, 20, 401-422.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page 208

Hmelo, C. E., & Guzdial, M. (1996). Of black and glass boxes: Scaffolding for learning and doing. In D. C. Edelson & E.
       A. Domeshek (Eds.), Proceedings of ICLS 96 (pp. 128-134). Charlottesville VA: Association for the Advancement
       of Computing in Education.
Hmelo, C. E., Guzdial, M., & Turns, J. (1998). Computer support for collaborative learning: Learning to support student
       engagement. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 9, 107-130.
O'Connor, M. C. Michaels, S.(1993). Aligning academic task and participation status through revoicing: Analysis of a
       classroom discourse strategy. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 24, 318-335.
Palincsar, A.(1998). Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 345-
       375.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1989). Rocky roads to transfer: Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected phenomenon.
       Educational Psychologist, 24, 113-142.
Schmidt, H. G., Machiels-Bongaerts, M., Hermans, H., ten Cate, T. J., Venekamp, R., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (1996). The
       development  of diagnostic competence:   Comparison  of a  problem-based,   an integrated,     and a conventional
       medical curriculum. Academic Medicine, 71, 658-664.
Schoenfeld, A. (1998). Toward a theory of teaching-in-context. Issues in Education, 4, 1-96.
Siegel, M., Derry, S.J., Kim, J., Steinkuehler, C., Street, J., Canty, N., Fassnacht, C., Hewson, K., Hmelo, C.E., & Spiro, R.
       (2000). Promoting Teachers' Flexible Use of the Learning Sciences through Case-Based Problem Solving on the
       WWW: A Theoretical Design Approach. In B. Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.), Proceedings of the
       Fourth International Conference of the   Learning Sciences (pp.   273-279). Mahwah,        NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum
       Associates.
Steinkuehler, C.A., Derry, S.J., Hmelo-Silver, C.E. & DelMarcelle, M. (in press) Cracking the resource nut with distributed
       problem-based learning in secondary teacher education. Journal of Distance Education.
