Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page   209

The STEP System for Collaborative Case-Based Teacher
      Education: Design, Evaluation & Future Directions
                Sharon J. Derry, Marcelle Siegel*, John Stampen, and the STEP Team(1)
                                          University of Wisconsin-Madison
                                                Sharond@wcer.wisc.edu
ABSTRACT
We report research and development work with STEP (Secondary Teacher Education Project) Web, an innovative and
complex web site designed to support learning through facilitated video case discussions in secondary teacher education
programs. The goal of instruction with STEP is to help pre-service teachers acquire useful scientific knowledge about
cognitive psychology and other learning sciences. STEP Web is currently being used and evaluated in connection with
psychological foundations courses taught for teacher education majors at UW-Madison and Rutgers University. We report
user preference data on web site design and related instructional formats, and provide evidence that the STEP approach can
produce transfer and flexible use of course concepts.

Keywords
Instructional Web Sites, Video Cases, Case-Based Learning, Teacher Education, Problem-Based Learning

INTRODUCTION
Case-based instruction (CBI) refers to a class of pedagogical methods in which learners acquire subject knowledge through
study and analysis of cases, often experts' solutions to real-world problems. For many years, CBI has been employed
extensively in both preservice and inservice teacher education with the aim of helping teachers acquire pedagogical and
theoretical knowledge that is grounded in situations like those they will encounter in professional practice (e.g., Shulman,
1992; Loucks-Horsley, Hewson, Love, & Stiles, 1998; Merseth, 1996). Typically, the instructional materials used with CBI
in teacher education are written narrative cases of various types, such as authentic classroom dilemmas faced by practicing
teachers (e.g., Harrington, 1995). Recently, however, there has been a strong, growing trend toward preference for video
cases of classroom    practice, a trend  partly motivated  by release of videotaped   lessons from the Third   International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS; e.g., Stigler & Hiebert, 1999). Case narratives are more convenient to develop
and use than video cases, and they are easier for teachers to comprehend and study. However, researchers argue that such
narrative cases oversimplify, and hence misrepresent, the "buzzing confusion" of true classroom life (e.g., Grossman, 1992,
p. 228; Koehler & Lehrer, 1998), and that oversimplified problem representation during learning may contribute to later
flawed reasoning in practice, such as "reductive bias" (e.g., Spiro et al., 1991). Video case-based methods may be an
especially  important form of    professional development   for preservice  teachers, who   may have  little opportunity to
experiment with instructional methods in classrooms (Putnam & Borko, 2000). Since classrooms in which education majors
observe and practice teach often do not represent the ideals of school reform (Shulman, 1992), video cases can help provide
better models for practice and visions of what is possible. Also, preliminary evidence indicates that video case methods in
preservice  programs  may  improve     reasoning, produce  more reflective practitioners, and produce  lasting effects (e.g.,
Copeland & Decker, 1996; Tochon, 1999).
Motivated by such arguments, researchers are now designing and investigating various technologies and socio-technical
infrastructures for making video cases more available and learning from video-case discussions more central to teacher
professional development in the United States (e.g., Barab et al., 2000; Chaney-Cullen & Duffy, 1999; Derry & the STEP
Research Group, 2000; Frederiksen et al., 1999; Lampert, & Ball, 1998; Marx, Blumenfeld, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1998).
Some projects have produced stand-alone multimedia systems to support teacher learning by individuals or small groups.
An example is CAPPS (Casebook of Project Practices), a multimedia system that scaffolds teachers as they study and learn
from video cases of classroom practice (Marx et al., 1998). Other projects are attempting to promote online case-based
teacher learning. For example, Barab et al. (2000) developed a video-based Internet technology that enables teachers to
upload video of their classes and remain in their classrooms while they go online to observe and discuss how teachers in
other sites are implementing     state standards. Stigler (personal communication)    and  Goldman-Segall (2001)   are  also
developing Internet technologies to support group discussions and learning from instructional video cases. A major online
commercial initiative is Teachscape (http://www.teachscape.com), described by its web site as follows:

* Marcelle A. Siegel is now located at the University of California at Berkeley, SEPUP, Lawrence Hall of Science #5200,
Berkeley, CA 94720-5200
(1) Other contributors included Constance Steinkuehler, Cindy Hmelo, Rand Spiro, David Woods, John Street, Youl-Kwan
 Sung, Julia Lee, Matt DelMarcelle, Jennifer Seymour, Paul Feltovich, Joan Feltovich, and Hakmo Koo
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page  210

      Teachscape is building a national community of educators by sharing real-world examples of excellent teaching in
         practice, by creating opportunities for online and in-school dialogue on teaching and learning, and by integrating
         on-site professional development support.
Another example is STEP (http://www.wcer.wisc.edu/step; Derry & the STEP Group, 2000; The STEP Research Group,
2000),  an  innovative  web   site  designed  to   support  facilitated video   case discussions  in secondary   teacher   education
programs. The site is currently being developed, used and evaluated in connection with psychological foundations courses
taught for teacher education majors at UW-Madison and Rutgers University. This paper will overview the design and
theoretical basis of the STEP site and related instructional procedures, report findings from evaluation studies involving its
use, and briefly overview future directions, including deveopment of the STEP environment for online problem-based
learning, described in another paper in this conference proceedings (Steinkuehler, Derry, Woods, & Hmelo, 2002).

THE STEP SITE
The goal of instruction with STEP is to help pre-service teachers acquire useful scientific knowledge about cognitive
psychology and other learning sciences that can flexibly be applied to the design and analysis of instructional environments.
Research has shown repeatedly that this type of transfer is a very difficult goal to achieve. Our premise is that high level
transfer of professional teaching knowledge and skill can be attained with our approach, partly inspired by Cognitive
Flexibility Theory (CFT) (e.g., Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobson & Coulson, 1991). A central argument of CFT is that many
instructional approaches     fail because  they  represent  complex  subject    matter in an   unrealistically simplified and  well-
structured manner. The most common kind of learning failure is reductive bias -- the tendency to over simplify approaches
and   solutions to complex    problems   encountered   in  the world    outside of class. CFT   holds  that the  goals of  advanced
knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains must include flexible and adaptive knowledge transfer, a process whereby
students spontaneously assemble an appropriate set of ideas as a basis for creating unique models of real-world problem
situations. This   goal requires   instructional  techniques that lead   students  to  re-examine  the same    domain  concepts  on
multiple occasions in the context of multiple real-world cases and problems.
Our instructional approach engages students in collaborative group problem solving supported by STEP Web, a complex
network of interactive conceptual relationships among cases and ideas within the domain of learning science applied to
teaching, and of tools for supporting navigation through and discussion of that domain. Thus, STEP Web represents a
hypermedia network of instructional resources designed to support video CBI. These resources include:
        Cases--stories of lessons, and of student learning and development resulting from lessons, in actual classrooms--
        that include edited video of the classroom, expert commentary and case analyses, plus additional materials that
        supply information about context
        Instructional problems and projects that make use of cases and are designed to promote in-depth analysis and,
        through such analysis, development of knowledge about how to support student growth through instruction

        A  network     of case-related links   to web pages    and other   resources  discussing  core  concepts    from  cognitive
         psychology and other learning sciences
        An environment for supporting facilitated online asynchronous discussions of video cases (pbl online)
        Links to additional tools and resources that teachers can use to help them adapt and implement ideas acquired from
         study of cases
To convey knowledge complexity and promote transfer and cognitive flexibility, instructional strategies, which determine
how   students  navigate     and  study the  complex   conceptual    terrain,   must   encourage  students  to   construct  multiple
understandings for cases and use concepts repeatedly in case analysis, in different combinations. The main strategy we are
using to help meet these conditions is an adapted version of Problem Based Learning (PBL; (Barrows, 1988). PBL is a form
of facilitated, small-group, student-centered instruction in which learners acquire subject matter by discussing, analyzing
and   reanalyzing  case-based     problems (e.g.,  redesign Mr.  Smith's  algebra    lesson), and by  conducting   research to  find
material (e.g., psychological concepts and related instructional methods) as required for solving the problems. STEP Web is
designed to be a resource for both online and face-to-face PBL in teacher education learning science courses.
Instruction with STEP Web ---An Example
In spring semester 2000, 55 students, enrolled in an educational psychology course that was the instructional centerpiece of
their third semester    in a four-semester  secondary  teacher    education curriculum,    were   assigned  to small groups  of 5-7
students that studied together in a PBL format. During the semester, each student participated in two different PBL groups.
Each group was assigned a case to study and a problem to solve using that case. For example, a case assigned to a group of
science majors was "Students Get a Charge out of Static Electricity." This case, presented on STEP Web as readings,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  211

videos, and inquiry materials, tells the story of an actual science unit in a public school taught by a popular teacher and
representing good traditional instruction. The problem was to advise Mr. Johnson (the teacher) on how to improve the unit
and to justify the group's redesign in learning-sciences language. Our expectation was that students would redesign the
lesson, developing a more authentic, inquiry-based approach for the unit.
After studying the case individually on STEP Web, students met with their groups to discuss the case. A teaching assistant
trained to facilitate a specific group method known as Problem Based Learning (e.g., Barrows, 1988) guided each group. In
accordance with this method, groups began by identifying learning issues--things they needed to learn more about in order
to solve the redesign problem. Between classes, students researched assigned learning issues, bringing varied findings to
their group discussions. STEP Web was made available as the primary research tool, which was used both during and
outside of class. The links and navigational tools in STEP Web scaffolded students' research while allowing them to pursue
interests in depth. Research beyond the materials in STEP Web was also promoted, since links led to other library and
WWW resources.
Each problem required about four weeks to complete. The TA guided students through collaborative discussions of their
research, during which time they identified positive and negative aspects of the instruction in the case and proposed new
instructional solutions. In the third week they posted their redesign      with explanations on a web   conference for peer
evaluation and consultation with experts, including scientists and educational experts. After revision, a group design report
was submitted and evaluated as a course requirement.

USER EVALUATIONS OF STEP WEB
The STEP implementation at UW-Madison during spring semester, 2000, represented a process of continuous user-centered
design in which students provided feedback that was used to upgrade and improve STEP Web throughout the semester.
Early in the semester, intensive feedback was obtained from a small number of students who volunteered to be research
subjects, but on March 7th and again on April 18th, all students were surveyed to obtain their feedback and satisfaction
ratings regarding the web site.
Fifty-four students returned surveys on March 7; fifty returned surveys on April 18. On these dates, 48 and 46 students
respectively reported using the web site as an instructional resource for their study and PBL research. Satisfaction with
STEP Web as an instructional resource was 3.9 on March 7 and 4.1 on April 18, based on a rating scale of scale of 1 - 5
(not very satisfied to very satisfied). Students' comments initiated a number of improvements and changes throughout the
semester. For example, the addition of a search engine was based on students' requests. Students' satisfaction with STEP
Web [also referenced as the Knowledge Web, or the KW, in comments below] increased as the site was improved and
students gained experience with it. For example, one student who participated in three surveys commented:
    Feb 22: "KW - impressed me this week . . .I did not research outside of it. " (No rating requested)
    Mar 7: "I am getting better at navigating the KW." (Rating = 4)
    Apr 18: "I am starting to appreciate the knowledge web." (Rating = 5)
Other representative student comments:
    "When I finally figured out how to use it, it was great." (Rating = 5)
    "I like the newer KW." (Rating = 4)
    "Much improved!" (Rating = 4)
    "Some pages that could have helped weren't up." (Rating = 4)
    "They [web pages] were quite useful but KW needs to be more easily navigated." (Rating = 3)
    "I found the KW to be confusing in some of its explanations (Rating = 3)
In sum, most   students  in the UW-Madison   course  were pleased   with    the knowledge web   by mid   semester, but their
comments indicated that further development and improvement is needed. Based on students' concerns, there is need to: 1.
add to and improve resources on STEP Web; 2. improve navigation; and 3. provide instructional supports within the course
to speed the process of learning how to use the site. We either have implemented or are currently working on these
improvements.
STEP Web was also used at Rutgers University in a smaller course taught by an experienced PBL instructor. There it was
positively rated despite being used at an early stage in its development. Based on fourteen students and a scale of 1 - 5 (not
very satisfied to very satisfied), the web site was rated 4.6. The textbook used in the course, a best-selling educational
psychology text, was rated 4.5.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   212

EVIDENCE OF TRANSFER AND FLEXIBLE CONCEPT USE
The evaluation study at UW-Madison also produced evidence of growth in students' ability and propensity to activate and
combine concepts from the learning sciences in the analysis of videotaped lessons. Also described in Siegel et al. (2001),
our assessment approach was grounded in Hierarchical Schema Theory (HST; Derry, 1996), which claims that students
should develop during a course in at least four different ways. One type of learning expected from a course is acquisition of
new   concepts,  independent   of   how    those concepts    are activated  and   applied across   contexts.  Such  acquisition is
demonstrated if a student is able to define or use a concept correctly when expressly told to do. For example, consider the
test item, "Define scaffolding and give an example." This question points directly to the concept that should be recalled and
used to answer it. If a student develops only this level of performance, she has merely acquired unusable knowledge.
However,   our  goal   was to help  students   acquire  usable,  flexible knowledge.   Related  to this goal, HST   predicts  three
additional types of growth. Second, the course should increase students' general propensity to activate learning sciences
ideas as frameworks for thinking about instructional situations. Third, not only should student teachers activate more
learning science ideas in instructional situations, the activated ideas should be the most relevant and important ones for
analyzing   particular situations.  Student    teachers  who   activate more  learning-sciences    knowledge    in thinking  about
instruction have grown to some degree, but students have developed further if they more frequently activate the ideas that
more expert analyzers agree fit particular contexts. Fourth, student teachers should integrate ideas to construct coherent
theoretical interpretations of situations. Concept activation supplies building blocks for this activity, but the construction of
conceptual  situation  models  requires    the recalling, mapping   and   combining   of  concepts into  coherent  interpretations.
Hence,   although some     growth   is indicated  when    a  course increases  students'  activation of  appropriate  concepts  in
instructional contexts for which those concepts are appropriate, there is greater growth if students discuss concepts within
the framework of a coherent situational model. Here we report a preliminary analysis from a pretest-posttest assessment of
these additional three types of course-related development predicted by HST.
Method
Of the 55 students who completed our spring 2000 course, 18 volunteers participated in this study. Two parallel versions of
the test   were developed,    Test  X    and   Test Y.   Each   version   consisted of two  video    segments   chosen   from   the
Annenberg/CPB "Minds of Our Own" series (Schneps & Mintzes, 1997), each followed by an essay question. For example,
video segment A from Test X depicted a good student completing an interview task both before and after a science lesson.
The  task  showed   that the  lesson   had not   apparently   improved  the student's  conceptual  understanding   of the flow  of
electricity in an electrical circuit. The student teachers in our study were asked to study the clip, reflect on it, and write a
coherent statement about why the student's understanding did not improve as a result of seemingly good instruction.
A counterbalanced design was employed. That is, for the pretest (given in the beginning of the STEP course), half of the
participants were assigned Test X and the other half were assigned Test Y. For the posttest (given during the last week of
the course), participants were assigned the alternate test. The participants, who were paid for their time, were instructed to
take home a compact disc containing the video segments, plan 45 minutes to devote to the task, and complete the entire test
in one sitting. Neither test explicitly directed students to incorporate learning science concepts from the course into their
answers; participants were notified that their responses would not be viewed or evaluated by their instructors.
After eliminating   two    subjects due  to    missing  data, sixteen   subjects remained,  eight  subjects  in each  of  the two
counterbalanced test conditions. Researchers who were "blind" to subjects' identities and time of testing coded and scored
essays as described in the analyses below.

Activation of Course Concepts
Our  first question  was   whether   the course   increased   students' propensity  to activate course   concepts  as interpretive
frameworks for the videos. Researchers first identified key concepts from the course, and then determined the number of
course concepts that each essay contained. Results, summarized in Table 1, indicated that students did spontaneously
activate a greater number of course concepts for instructional situations presented in video cases, after the course.
    Table 1. Descriptive statistics of the number of concepts included in pretest and posttest essays, by question.
                         Question 1                                         Question 2
                         Pretest                    Posttest                Pretest                  Posttest
    Mean                 1.13                       2.94                    0.19                     0.81
    Standard             0.62                       2.44                    0.40                     1.11
    Deviation
    Range                0--2                       0--9                    0--1                     0--3
    N                    16                         16                      16                       16
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  213

Selective Activation of Most Relevant Concepts
Next we asked whether there was a trend toward increased activation of concepts determined, by more expert reasoners, to
be particularly appropriate for the given video scenarios. Two doctoral students in Educational Psychology, who helped
teach the course, took Test X and Test Y collaboratively. They identified a set of relevant concepts and selected from these
the two  or three most   important   "key  concepts" for each   video situation. For  example, the   key concepts  for Text X,
Segment A, were misconceptions, prior knowledge, and tools. Additional appropriate concepts were hands-on learning,
explanation-based learning, knowledge construction, zone of proximal development, assessment, and disequilibrium. We
then coded for and counted the number of appropriate and key concepts present in the student teachers' essays. We gave
credit if students could either name a concept or correctly discuss it without using the exact term.
For both video segments, there was a marked pre- to posttest gain in number of situation-appropriate concepts activated.
Examination of key concepts alone revealed the same trend. Gains for the most important key concepts averaged 1.38 for
both questions combined; gains for the other appropriate concepts averaged 1.0. These results suggest that during the
course,  student teachers   did develop   in their tendency  to selectively activate  relevant learning-sciences  concepts  for
different instructional situations.
Further examination determined that almost all key concepts identified by "experts" were also identified by student teachers
following  the course.   Even   for  key  concepts that were  not explicitly  mentioned,  student  teachers  employed   related
theoretical ideas in their analyses.

Constructing Situation Models of Teaching
We also examined whether preservice teachers learned to adaptively integrate concepts into particular situational mental
models of the instructional scenarios presented in the video segments. We developed a hierarchical taxonomy of plausible
situational models. Each situation model was based on an underlying understanding of the interaction between teaching and
learning, which can range from a simple transmission view (e.g., teaching is information transmission and learning is
additive) to a more complex constructivist view (e.g., teaching is a form of assisted practice and learning is knowledge
construction). We    adapted  our    taxonomy  from  a  heavily researched   scheme   developed  by   the Cognitively  Guided
Instruction project (e.g., Fennema, Carpenter, Franke, Jacobs, & Empson, 1996).

    Table 2. Summary of Situation Models

    Level         Situation Model in Brief
    1             Teaching is showing and telling.
    2             Students interpret instruction using prior knowledge.
    3             Students' prior knowledge affects design of curriculum and classroom interaction.
    4             Teaching is based on a developmental theory of disciplinary knowledge.

The hierarchical coding scheme included four levels of situation models of instructional contexts, briefly summarized in
Table 2, as well as sublevels. At level 1, the respondent believes that for a student to learn science, a teacher has to show
them or tell them (Fennema et al., 1996). A respondent at this level does not recognize the importance of students' prior
conceptions. For example, a response might include a statement such as, "because the teacher never explained how to
complete  the  task, the student    never understood the concept." At   level 2,  the respondent  begins  to view  disciplinary
knowledge as important to learning (Fennema et al., 1996). We created several subcategories of this level, with higher sub-
categories being scored as 2.5. Respondents at lower levels recognized and minimally described the importance of prior
knowledge. For example, one response began, "If the teacher was able to first find out what all his students knew...," but
did not go on to connect this idea to an instructional approach. Students at higher levels expressed the idea that instruction
must respond to students' prior knowledge. For example, one student blamed performance on misconceptions that "were
not addressed during the lesson in a direct enough way." At level 3, teachers believe that student thinking should determine
the evolution of curriculum and the ways a teacher interacts with individuals (Fennema et al., 1996). The teacher needs to
interact with  students  to create   challenging situations and conceptual  conflict. For this stage, the  teacher specifically
assesses students' prior knowledge. Respondents at this level said the reason students in the video did not understand what
was being taught was not only because the teacher did not assess prior knowledge, but also because the teacher needed to
maintain an interaction with the students in order to teach more effectively and challenge students. For example, one
student teacher stated, " It is the teacher's job to challenge those previously held views and to engage students in an
authentic process leading toward that goal and assessed in a way that tests growth in knowledge/changes in knowledge
against prior misconceptions." The most sophisticated situation model in our hierarchy was level 4. At this point, the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  214

teacher holds a developmental theory of disciplinary knowledge and, based on this viewpoint, has a sense of how to teach
certain ways at certain times and why. (Fennema et al., 1996).
Our data indicated that before the course, student teachers often used level 1 models in which teaching is merely the one-
way transmission of information. Level 2 models, in which prior knowledge of the student is recognized, were also used,
and a few higher-level 2 models were utilized as well. On the posttest, only two people used level 1 models, a few used
level 2  models, the majority  used higher level     2 models, and   four people  constructed level 3 models.  None  of  the
participants, on either assessment, developed a level 4 situational model in which teaching is based on the trajectory of
students' disciplinary knowledge. Table 3 summarizes these data.
  Table 3. Situation Models Results

                       Pretest                   Posttest
   N                   16                        16
   Mean                1.84                      2.31
   SD                  0.54                      .68
   Range               1-2.5                     1-3

One important aspect to note about the quality of the essays is that the students, as well as the experts, did not employ
single theoretical frameworks, such as information processing or Piagetian psychology, in video case analysis, but rather
flexibly applied pieces from different theories. For example, a higher-level 2 discussion might incorporate concepts of
transfer and working  memory    from  information      processing theory, but  also mention cognitive  apprenticeship, from
sociocultural theory. Such observations provide additional evidence that the course and site design are promoting the goals
of cognitive flexibility theory, as we intended.

Narrative Case Vignettes versus Video Cases Online
Data from the fall, 2000, implementation of the STEP course at UW-Madison were used to compare students' perceptions
of lengthy PBL projects anchored to complex video cases embedded within STEP Web to brief PBL projects anchored to
short case vignettes presented as written narratives. Figure 1 graphs students' ratings of PBL activities within three course
sections representing different teaching certification areas. The rating scale asked students to judge the usefulness of the
PBL exercise for helping them learn to teach. The data points labeled as cases 1, 3, and 4 show mean usefulness ratings for
short PBL activities based on narrative case vignettes. Data points labeled Large PBL parts 1 and 2 show mean usefulness
ratings at two points in time during a four-week activity based on a lengthy video case analysis. That the substantial upward
shift in satisfaction at point 4 occurred for all sections at the time video cases were introduced and was maintained through
the next testing period at point 5 strongly implies that students' perceptions of instructional usefulness was more favorable
for the video-based PBL that is the standard instructional format for STEP courses. Thus, video case-based instruction may
be preferred to the narrative case format typically used in teacher education.

CURRENT DIRECTIONS
STEP Web and its associated instructional model are complex, but results from several implementations show that the
approach may be producing desired learning goals and that it is appreciated by students. Encouraged by the preliminary
results reported above, we are now continuing three specific lines of work.
Expanding STEP resources, focusing specifically on the development of new and improved video-based instructional cases
for five secondary teaching disciplines: mathematics, science, social studies, English and foreign language.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                         page  215

                                                                                          Figure 1
                                                                            Mean Usefulness Rating
                                                                                by Section/Case
                                                                                 [N= 68, n=59]

                                         5.5

                                           5

                                         4.5

                                           4

                                         3.5

                                           3

                                         2.5
                                                         Case 1                    Case 3                    Case 4               Large Pbl - Part 1          Large Pbl - Part 2
                        English/Social Studies         3.681818182               3.318181818               3.380952381               3.952380952                4.111111111
                        Math/Science                   3.833333333               3.714285714               3.714285714               4.058823529                4.157894737
                        World Language                 3.833333333               4.090909091               3.916666667               4.615384615                4.538461538
                        Class Mean                     3.769230769               3.617021277               3.62962963                4.156862745                    4.24

    Cognitive research that will guide design of better instructional cases and group procedures for case-based and PBL
     instruction in STEP               Web.      One   interesting          question         in case design         suggested  by project              collaborator              Rand Spiro
     (personal communication;                    Spiro et          al., 2001)   is whether         video  instruction         using  computer-enhanced                           perceptual
     overlays that employ color, sound, and imagery to emphasize themes in video cases can accelerate teachers' acquisition
     of learning science concepts applied to classroom instruction. In collaboration with Spiro we are also planning to
     investigate whether such perceptual enhancements can highlight complex thematic interactions in video cases, helping
     learners acquire the ability to think flexibly and interpret classroom interactions from multiple perspectives.
    Research  and  development                    leading      to  more    sophisticated         conferencing          tools within STEP.              This  line          of    work will
     enable us to offer a distributed (distance) form of problem-based learning instruction in STEP, which will permit
     improved course implementation on a large scale with fewer human resources. The STEP pbl environment, which has
     been beta tested at Rutgers, provides new users with early guidance in use of STEP Web, reducing the time required to
     become familiar  with              the     complex         site    and its instructional        procedures.         The  STEP   pbl              environment         also     supplies
     toolkits to support inexperienced facilitators and course managers. This work is described in more detail elsewhere in
     this proceedings (Steinkuehler et al., 2002).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was     supported             by       a grant        from    the Joyce         Foundation,   Grant           #REC-0107032                 from the National             Science
Foundation, and by the National Institute for Science Education, a cooperative agreement between the National Science
Foundation and the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The ideas expressed may not be representative of positions endorsed
by these agencies.

REFERENCES
Barab, S., Moore, J., Cunningham, D., & the ILF Design Team. (2000, April). The Internet Learning Forum: A new model
        for online professional development. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
        Association, New Orleans LA.
Barrows, H. (1988). The tutorial process. Springfield IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Chaney-Cullen, & Duffy, T. (1999). Strategic Teaching Framework: Multimedia to Support Teacher Change, Journal of the
        Learning Sciences 8(1), 1-40.
Copeland, W. D., & Decker, D. L. (1996). Video cases and the development of meaning making in preservice teachers.
        Teaching and Teacher Education, 12(5), 467-481.
Derry, S.J. (1996). Cognitive schema theory in the constructivist debate. Educational Psychologist, 31 (3/4), 163-174.
Derry, S. J. and the STEP Project Group (October, 2000). Taking STEPs toward infusing modeling and visualization
        technologies               into teacher      education.          Paper     prepared        for NSF-sponsored            workshop,               Infusing         Modeling      and
        Visualization Technologies into Teacher Education, Washington, D.C.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 216

Fennema, E., Carpenter, T.P., Franke, M.L., Levi, L., Jacobs, V., & Empson, S. (1996). Learning to use children's thinking
         in mathematics instruction: A longitudinal study. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education 27 (4), 403-434.
Frederiksen, J.  (1999).  Supporting   professional development   and   improving  practice using   video  case examples of
         classroom practices collected for that purpose. Paper presented at the meeting of the Board on International
         Comparative Studies in Education, National Academy of Sciences Invitational Meeting, Washington, DC.
Goldman-Segall, R. (2001). Presentation at Annual Meeting, American Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA.
Grossman, P. L. (1992). Teaching and learning with cases: Unanswered questions. In J. H. Shulman (Ed.), Case methods in
         teacher education (pp. 227-239). New York: Teachers College Press.
Harrington,  H.  L. (1995). Fostering  reasoned    decisions: Case-based   pedagogy  and   the professional development  of
         teachers. Teaching and Teacher Education, 11(3), 203-214.
Koehler, M.  J.  (1999).  Designing  case-based  hypermedia    tools to  help teachers understand   children's  mathematical
         development. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Koehler, M. J., & Lehrer, R. (1998). Designing a hypermedia tool for learning about children's mathematical cognition.
         Journal of Educational Computing Research, 18(2), 123-145.
Krajcik, J. S., Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (1994). A collaborative model for helping teachers learn
         project-based instruction. Elementary School Journal, 94(5), 483-497.
Lampert, M., & Ball, D. L. (1998). Teaching multimedia and mathematics: Investigations of real practice. New York:
         Teacher College Press.
Loucks-Horsley, S., Hewson, P. W., Love, N., & Stiles, K. E. (1998). Designing professional development for teachers of
         science and mathematics. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Marx, R.  W.,   Blumenfeld,   P. C., Krajcik, J. S.  &   Soloway,  E.   (1998). New  technologies   for teacher professional
         development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 14(1), 33-52.
Merseth, K. K. (1996). Cases and case methods in teacher education. In J. Sikula (Ed.), Handbook of research on teacher
         education (pp. 722-744). New York: Macmillan.
Putnam, R. T. & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say about research on teacher
         learning. Educational Researcher, 29(1), pp. 4-15.
Schneps, M.  H.  (Executive   Producer), & Mintzes,   J. (Director   of Research). (1997).  Minds   of our own  [Videotape].
         Washington, DC: Annenberg/CPB.
Shulman, L. (1992). Toward a pedagogy of cases. In J. H. Shulman (Ed.), Using case methods in teacher education (pp. 1-
         30). New York: Teachers College Press.
Siegel, M., Derry, S., Steinkuehler, C., Kim, J., & Seymour, J. (Apr, 2001). What and How Preservice Teachers Learn:
         Designing A Course that Fosters Development of Useful Theoretical Knowledge and the Assessment Methods to
         Capture It. Paper presented at AERA Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., Jacobson, M. & Coulson, R. L. (1991a). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism and hypertext:
         Advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. Educational Technology, 31(5), 24-33.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., & Coulson, R. L. (1992). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and hypertext: Random access
         instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains In T. M. Duffy & D. H. Jonassen (Eds.),
         Constructivism and the technology of instruction: A conversation (pp. 57-75). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Spiro, R. J., Zaritsky, R., Feltovich, P. J., Coulson, R. L., Theta, J. (April, 2001). Teaching for transfer with digital video
         cases. Symposium paper presented at AERA Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA.
Steinkuehler, C. A., Derry, S. J., Woods, D. & Hmelo, C. (Jan 2002). The STEP environment for distributed problem-based
         learning on the WWW. Paper presented at CSCL 2002, Boulder, CO.
The STEP Research Group* (2000). Promoting teachers' flexible use of the learning sciences through case-based problem
         solving on   the WWW:      A  theoretical  design approach.    In B.   Fishman &   S.  O'Connor-Divelbiss   (Eds.),
         Proceedings  of  the Fourth   International Conference   of  the  Learning Sciences   (pp. 273-279).  Mahwah,  NJ:
         Erlbaum. (*M. Siegel, S. Derry, J. Kim, C. Steinkuehler, J. Street, N. Canty, C. Fassnacht, K. Hewson, C. Hmelo,
         & R. Spiro)
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap. New York: Free Press.
Tochon,  F.  V.  (1999).  Video  study groups for   education,  professional  development,  and  change.   Madison: Atwood
         Publishing
