Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 217

    The STEP Environment for Distributed Problem-Based
                             Learning on the World Wide Web
       Constance A. Steinkuehler, Sharon J. Derry, David K. Woods, Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver
                             steinkuehler@students.wisc.edu, University of Wisconsin­Madison
                          {SharonD; DWoods}@wcer.wisc.edu, University of Wisconsin­Madison
                                        chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu, Rutgers University

ABSTRACT
Successful elementary and secondary educational reform requires analogous reform in teacher education; however, the
standard undergraduate setting in schools of education poses considerable obstacles. In this paper, we describe the STEP
environment for distributed problem-based learning (www.eSTEPweb.org), which represents one of many efforts to create
a viable model for teacher education reform. Here, we describe our approach to creating a socio-technical infrastructure
designed to help foster a knowledge-building community among preservice teachers, practicing teachers, and instructional
staff. We highlight the online environment that supports student and staff coursework in the learning sciences component of
a secondary teacher education curriculum.

Keywords
Problem-based learning, case-based learning, teacher education, conceptual change

INTRODUCTION
Successful elementary and secondary educational reform requires analogous reform in teacher education and professional
development (Loucks-Horsley, Hewson, Love, & Stiles, 1998); if we want teachers to transform their classrooms from
traditional  "chalk  and talk" environments   into authentic  "knowledge   building communities"   (Scardamalia &    Bereiter,
1994), we must likewise transform ours. However, the standard undergraduate setting in schools of education at large
universities  poses  considerable obstacles  to such  reform  on  both the concrete and conceptual  level   (Derry, Seymour,
Steinkuehler, Lee, & Siegel, in press; Steinkuehler, Derry, Hmelo-Silver, DelMarcelle, in press): lack of space, scheduling
constraints, insufficient and inconsistent staffing, training limitations, legal credentialing requirements, professional risks
associated with instructional innovations, ideational fragmentation (Ball, in press) within teacher education programs that
often engenders competing discourses or "voices" (Wertsch, 1991), and, in some courses, students' legitimate fear of theory
(Simon, 1992). Together, such factors pose a considerable challenge to efforts to build sustainable knowledge building
communities of teachers. The question is not whether to pursue such reform, however, but how.
No single technology or pedagogy can be a panacea for schools of education; however, well-designed socio-technical
infrastructures (Barab, Kling, & Gray, in press) that are context- and community-sensitive might at least broaden our
conception of what's possible in teacher educational reform. Online environments that are designed to be sensitive to the
contexts in which they are embedded can make possible the accumulation of knowledge and practice of the communities
they are to serve. Internet technologies hold great promise for teacher education programs by enabling teacher educators to
avert many of the concrete barriers to reform efforts; for example, we can now provide students ample space (albeit virtual)
for collaborative    work and   reduce the   need  to coordinate   schedules   by  enabling "anytime/anywhere"      interaction
(Benbunan-Fich & Hiltz, 1999). In combination with pedagogies that provide a social structure for collaborative, student-
centered activities, such technologies can be a viable solution for teacher educators searching for feasible ways to practice
what they preach.

THE STEP SOCIO-TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
The Secondary Teacher Education Project (STEP) at the University of Wisconsin-Madison represents one of many efforts
to create a viable model for preservice teacher education reform. STEP is an ongoing and continuously evolving research
and development effort to design a socio-technical infrastructure -- technical environment and related social structure and
activities   -- that fosters and  sustains  knowledge-building    communities   among   preservice and  practicing   teachers,
instructional staff, and disciplinary mentors (subject-matter specialists). As discussed in Derry et al. (in press), our goal is to
develop    a technology-based   distributed professional learning community    in which instructional staff mentor  teams  of
students who collaborate on instructional design projects which, when possible, are then implemented in the classrooms of
local cooperating    teachers. Through  these   instructional design projects, members   of  the community    construct  (and
reconstruct) shared knowledge about teaching and learning on the basis of current research and theory and in the context of
authentic practice, producing artifacts, such as model lessons, that would constitute an evolving communal knowledge base.
This community is slowly evolving, with our current implementation representing an early intermediate stage of progress.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                           page  218

SOCIAL STRUCTURES & ACTIVITIES
This model is currently realized under the rubric of problem-based learning (PBL) and in the context of a foundations
course in educational psychology. PBL is a collaborative learning method in which small groups of students, facilitated by
an instructor or "tutor," learn content by solving problems (Barrows, 1985; Hmelo & Ferrari, 1997). We chose PBL as a
framework for structuring students' collaborative design projects because we wanted to anchor students' design work in the
context of real-world problem solving and replace passive acquisition of course content with authentic, student-driven
inquiry. Previous experience with PBL in an undergraduate educational psychology course suggests that students engage
with the course content and revisit educational psychology content across multiple cases (Hmelo-Silver, in press). Other
research suggests that PBL leads to positive learning outcomes (Hmelo, 1998; Hmelo, Holton, & Kolodner, 2001). The
design goal for our course is to develop students' propensity to use current theory and research in the learning sciences
(fields of research on   cognition      and education       such  as educational psychology,    cognitive      psychology,    and  cognitive
science) as tools for designing instruction -- to foster useful knowledge, not inert information. Moreover, by situating
instructional design in the context of collaboration rather than isolated independent practice, PBL activities should afford
preservice teachers in our course the opportunity to engage in sustained collaborative work of the type we want practicing
teachers to engage in.
Students in our course learn to apply the learning sciences to teaching through collaborative problem solving based on
videocases of actual classroom instruction. The problem students are asked to solve is to develop an adaptation or redesign
proposal for the instruction depicted in the videocase, based on learning sciences research. In order to solve each problem,
students conduct an individual preliminary analysis of the videocase and then meet with their group online to share and
negotiate their ideas, generate learning issues, conduct research, and then reason through their preliminary ideas in light of
what they  investigate.  Once       the group has     completed    their deliberations, each  student  composes       his  or her  own   final
solution proposal, compares it to other solutions, and then reflects back on the products and processes so generated. This
helps prepare the students to develop a flexible understanding of the concepts with the goal of having them transfer it to
their professional practice. Students' instructional design projects, then, are the result of their individual and collaborative
problem solving; later implementations of those projects in the classrooms of local cooperating teachers (where the students
observe and teach) constitute a "test" of the feasibility of the design solutions generated.
In this way, pbl1, as implemented in our course, serves as one enabling social infrastructure for supporting development of
a knowledge building community by fostering the joint production and negotiation of community knowledge and skills in
the form of shared practices and artifacts. Our modifications to the traditional PBL format were motivated by the work of
Scardamalia and Bereiter's (1994) who state, "When we speak of schools as knowledge-building communities, we mean
schools in which people are engaged in producing knowledge objects that...lend themselves to being discussed, tested, and
so forth...and in which the students see their main job as producing and improving such objects. Restructuring schools as
knowledge-building   communities         means...getting      the  community's  efforts  directed    toward    social processes    aimed   at
improving these objects, with technology providing a particularly facilitative infrastructure" (p. 270).

TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT
The  technical  infrastructure      (www.  eSTEPweb.org)          we are  now  putting  in  place to  facilitate both      student and   staff
coursework consists of several overlapping modules designed to support the needs and functions of different categories of
members within the community (see Figure 1). Using ZOPE, an open-source web application server, in combination with
an extensive SQL database, we have now fully implemented a Student Module designed to structure and scaffold student
work (discussed in detail below), a Tutor Module which provides a suite of tools and resources for instructional staff who
tutor pbl groups, a Course Manager Module, which allows instructors to adapt elements of the students' environment to suit
the local context and needs, and a Research Module which supports our own ongoing research and development work. We
have yet to fully engage practicing teachers from local schools in our online community, although dialogues are beginning
to take place.
Course Manager Module
The  Course  Manager     Module      will provide     the   basic functions  necessary  for  establishing  and   tailoring    our online  pbl
activities to a given context. Using this module, the "course manager" or instructor will be able to create the instructional
unit or course by defining four things: (a) the community members and their roles (which students will be working together,
which staff will be tutoring them, etc.); (b) content materials to be used (which problem and case will be used, whether all
groups will work with the same problem or different problems, etc.); (c) which tools and activities are to be included; and

   1 We use "PBL" to refer to the Problem-Based Learning technique originally designed by Barrows (1985); we use "pbl" (all lowercase letters) to refer
   to the modified version of problem-based learning used by STEP. We maintain this distinction throughout our work in order to acknowledge the fact
   that we employ online asynchronous     discussions while Cameron, Barrows & Crooks (2000) specify that such discussions should always occur
   synchronously. Our use of asynchronous rather than synchronous environments was a deliberate design decision; the rationale behind this decision is
   discussed later in the paper.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 219

(d) the time frames in which the community members' activities are to take place. Based on these selections, the system
assembles the appropriate tools and resources for both student and staff use.

                        Figure 1. Diagram illustrating the interacting modules of the STEP online environment.

By providing course managers flexibility in selecting which content materials (b above) and tools and activities (c above)
will be used, we hope to  insure that  our technical   infrastructure is context-   and community-sensitive by   permitting
adaptation of the system to local context. The resources, tools, and activities that comprise students' and staffs' pbl work
help shape the community's accumulation of knowledge and practice; therefore, allowing flexible adaptation of the online
environment to local needs and goals is critical. Toward this end, we provide a suite of options for each tool and activity
wherever possible. For example, the instructor will be able to select the layout of the interactive tools that students and staff
will use during their activities, from a set of pre-built options, and will be able to edit the headings of the tools in order to
guide students' learning in different ways (cf. Suthers, 1999; 2000). He or she will also make certain resources available,
such as previous successful solutions to the given problem, in order to tailor students' activities to the particulars of the
local community goals and practical time constraints.
Tutor Module
In pbl, tutors play a critical role in determining what and how students learn throughout their activities; they monitor the
flow of each student's activities, perform metacognitive functions for the group (e.g., probing students' reasoning, asking
"why?"), and make educational diagnoses in terms of both product (knowledge) and process (critical thinking) (Hmelo-
Silver, 2002). As argued in Steinkuehler et al. (in press), accomplishing these responsibilities is a challenge for the most
seasoned tutors; for new staff members with little training who must facilitate several groups at once, it is a tall order
indeed. The Tutor Module we are developing is designed to provide instructional staff the assistance, scaffolding and
support necessary for successfully tutoring multiple online groups at once. Through this module, instructional staff working
with groups can access an outline of suggested group activities, practical suggestions for guiding students' collaborative
work "from the side" without being intrusive, and example "conversational moves" that can be used to probe students'
knowledge  and reasoning. In addition, we  are developing    online   tools   for diagnosing group interactions such      as an
"Interaction Matrix" that provides a snapshot of the level of engagement within each group and indicators of the equity of
participation, a Target Group Report that summarizes solutions to the given problem that have proven successful in the
past, and full access to each group member's products so that educational diagnoses can be made. Together, this bank of
online tools and resources will scaffold tutors as they, in turn, scaffold students through the collaborative process.
Researcher Module
The technical environment of the STEP system not only will serve as the environment in which course activities and
community collaboration occurs, it also will serve as our research instrumentation. The online system includes a system-
wide monitoring and assessment component that will enable researchers and staff to diagnose and assess students' online
products and processes. For example, it captures a "trace" of each user's activities (e.g., sequences of pages accessed) and
data entries (e.g., students' responses to reflection questions, discussed below) for basic research, course management, and
site/curriculum development purposes. Such data are stored in a protected database that can be "harvested" via the Research
Module and easily exported to statistical software packages for subsequent analyses.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 220

THE STUDENT MODULE
The Student Module, currently being tested, is at the heart of the STEP pbl system. It is here that preservice teachers engage
in both individual and collaborative work. The interface of the module, shown in Figure 2, consists of three main elements:
(1) a representational overview of the activities, (2) a suite of resources that remain accessible at all times, and (3) a center
workspace. Together, these elements   form a digital dashboard:     work conducted in the center space is     framed  by a
representation signaling where the individual is in the overall activity (top) and a bank of interactive tools and resources
(left). Students navigate through the space using the "sidewalk" overview at the top of the browser or the next and back
buttons; however, the system scaffolds students' progression through the activity space by dynamically tracing what each
student has completed and then providing access to the next activity or session in the series based on this trace, thereby
guiding students through the appropriate sequence of phases or steps and ensuring adequate attention to each.

                             Figure 2. Interface of the STEP pbl Student Module Interface. The third step
                                 is active with the Teacher's Conference appearing in the workspace.

Overview of the Activities
Students' activities are represented as steps down a sidewalk and are organized into three main phases, distinguished in the
interface by different shades of color. Figure 2 shows a series of 12 activity steps, however, the actual number and order is
determined by the instructor, who can enable or disable particular ancillary activities as described above. Together, these
three phases of activities are designed to prompt students to explicate the beliefs and assumptions about teaching and
learning that they bring to the activity, to engage students in a collaborative activity and environment in which the import of
learning science research to instruction can be negotiated and jointly reasoned through, and to facilitate individual belief
revision and metacognitive awareness.
The first phase of activities (steps 1-2) is designed to help students mine the videocase in order to construct and make
explicit their initial situation model (e.g., Derry, 1996) of the teaching and learning observed therein. During this session,
students are scaffolded through a pre-analysis of the videocase designated by the assigned problem. After individuals
complete the preliminary individual phase, having gained some initial experience with the purpose of the pbl activities and
the opportunity to begin thinking deeply about the problem, they join their group (of five to six other preservice teachers
enrolled in the course) and tutor online (step 3, shown in Figure 2 above) to develop a consensus solution to the problem
that is justified in terms of the learning sciences. The goal of this central phase of activities (steps 3-10) is to help students
reconstruct the situation model of teaching and learning they explicated during the first phase based on what they discover
through investigation and online interaction with other peers.
Toward this end, members share and suggest solutions to the problem, synthesize a list of solution ideas they will commit
to as a group, and then generate a list of related learning science concepts that need to be investigated. Students conduct
research using the Knowledge Web (described below) and other online and offline resources and then return to the group
discussion to reason through the import of their pooled research on the solution ideas they initially proposed, specifying not
just what was discovered but also how it bears on the solution ideas discussed so far. In the third and final phase of
activities (steps 10-12), each student writes an individual final solution proposal to the problem, compares and contrasts
their solution with others, and then reflects back on both the products and processes resulting from their activities. This
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 221

final phase allows individual assessment in addition to group assessment, which is necessary since teacher certification is
based on individual performance. More importantly, however, these follow-up activities help students come to understand
how their own understanding of the relationships among teaching, learning, and instructional redesign has been revised as a
result of their group work.

Resources
A suite of tools and resources, located to the left of the workspace, is intended to scaffold and structure students' products
and processes. Here, students can access online interactive tools for constructing their individual and group products (My
Notebook, Teacher's Conference, Group Report) as well as general resources for the problem (the videocase, a Research
Library, and pbl Help).  Each   resource,   described separately  below,  appears  as a   second pop-up   window  that can be
accessed at any time during the activities.
My Notebook
My Notebook contains all of the online tools students need to complete their individual work. Appearing as a tabbed
sequence of four pages (Figure 3), My Notebook contains an Initial Ideas tool designed to structure each student's pre-
analysis of the problem and videocase, a Research Notes page which provides online space for the student to take notes
during their investigation into the research literature, a Final Solution Proposal page where each student enters a final
individual product, and a Reflection page containing open-ended questions which prompt reflection on both product (e.g.,
"What limitations are there, if any, on implementing the solution you proposed?") and process (e.g., "What would you do
differently next time?"). As discussed earlier, the course manager selects the layout and text prompts of each tool contained
in My Notebook; which tool structure(s) are most effective for learning, however, is an empirical question we intend to
pursue.

                 Figure 3. Interface of My Notebook. The first tab is active with the Initial Ideas tool appearing in the pop-
                                                                  up workspace.

Teacher's Conference & Group Report
During their collaborative work, students will make their knowledge and reasoning public through a combination of an
asynchronous  discussion    environment, the  Teacher's  Conference,   and  strategically designed online  group  product, the
Group Report. Our decision to use this combination of collaborative spaces was strategic (Steinkuehler et al., in press):
Together, they translate student reasoning into public artifact.
Previously we   conducted   problem-based    learning activities in  the classroom using   a face-to-face format.  By  moving
collaboration to an online asynchronous environment, we are able to transform discussion from a temporal unfolding of talk
to a cascade  of inscriptions. Threaded     discussions have   been   shown  to have  distinct advantages  over   synchronous
discussions, fostering more serious and lengthy interactions (Bonk, Hansen, Grabner-Hagen, Lazar, & Mirabelli, 1998),
more reflective responses (Davidson-Shivers, Tanner & Muilenburg, 2000), increased group interaction (Eastmond, 1992),
more  equitable communication    patterns   (Harasim,   1990),   and enhancement   of the  quantity and   quality of students'
solutions to case-based problems (Benbunan-Fich & Hiltz, 1999). Used alone, however, the hierarchical organization of
such tools can obscure rather than expose the group's line of reasoning (Hiltz, Johnson, & Turoff, 1986); because new posts
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   222

are added chronologically, the content of each thread can become more and more diffuse, leading to "a sense of information
overload and confusion about the intellectual focus of the community" (Hewitt, 1997). In order to prevent this outcome, we
combine such discussion with a shared workspace for recording the group's consensus argument, the Group Report.

                  Figure 4. Interface of the Group Report, a collaborative pop-up workspace in which group members post
                                                           their consensus ideas.

As depicted in Figure 4, the Group Report is a more elaborated version of the two columns of the Initial Ideas tool that
individual students use prior to group work to record their initial ideas (i.e., "what should be done" and "why it should be
done") with the addition of a space in which to cite both confirming and disconfirming evidence (for a classic discussion of
"confirmation bias," see Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1972) and a space in which to cite the source of their claims. Using this
tool, each group records its consensus solution ideas and the relationship of these ideas to the results of the group's pooled
learning science research, making the group thinking visible for students and staff alike.
As with the Initial Ideas tool, the course manager will be able to select the layout and text prompts of the tool; although,
again, we  intend to empirically   study the  effects of different "representation guidance"      (Suthers, 1999) on learning
outcomes so that the set of options we provide instructors will be based on research. Our research on this issue follows the
work of Suthers (2000), which demonstrates how alternative representations of relationships among claims and evidence
shape the discussion of groups using them. The Group Report tool presented in Figure 4, for example, coordinates both
individual and group activities by (1) making the constituent elements of the group argument (i.e., claims, pros and cons,
evidence) salient and therefore more likely to be attended to, negotiated and elaborated upon, (2) making the relationships
between these elements explicit, thereby providing a framework within which group members can negotiate how the results
of their research bear on their solution ideas, and (3) makes the gaps or absences within the argument conspicuous, hence a
topic for discussion. Different Group Report representations, then, should foster different forms of collaborative reasoning,
making the design and systematic investigation of alternative tool formats a worthwhile avenue for future research.
Case & Research Library
The problems students solve in our environment will be structured around videocases of actual classroom instruction. We
are beginning to develop a Case Library that eventually will incorporate a full spectrum of instruction -- from innovative,
research-based instruction to conventional pedagogical techniques -- so that the preservice teachers taking our course are
exposed to both model instruction (innovative pedagogies that are not always represented in the schools where they observe
and teach) as well as instructional problems likely to be encountered out in the field. Using video rather than text exposes
students to the complexities of in situ teaching practice, in all its "buzzing confusion"(Grossman, 1992), thereby deterring
reductive bias (Spiro, Feltovich,   Jacobson, &  Coulson,   1991)   and fostering  high    levels of transfer  (Siegel, Derry,
Steinkuehler, Kim, & Seymour, 2001; STEP, 2000). STEP research on the design and evaluation of collaborative case-
based teacher education is extensive; for further discussion, see Derry & STEP (2002) in this volume.
Once the course manager selects the content materials students are to work with from the Case Library, the appropriate case
and case-related  materials (e.g., demographic  information, the   teacher's handouts and    overheads,  interviews  with  the
teacher and/or students) are automatically made available to students from within the Student Module Interface. The Case
Library is part of a larger section of our site called the Knowledge Web (Derry & STEP, 2000). The Knowledge Web is a
densely interlinked network of learning science concepts connected to each videocase (see Figure 1). Each videocase, then,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  223

is linked to related learning science concepts that serve as a "jumping off" point for student research. Each page of this
hypertextbook resource contains an overview of a given concept, examples of its application to instructional design, and a
list of further resources for more in-depth research. In addition to the Knowledge Web, the Research Library also contains
links and references  to both online   and offline research  resources, including  online journals, recommended   websites,
suggested textbooks,  and  relevant   academic journal databases   such as the Educational  Resources   Information  Center
(ERIC) and the American Psychological Association's Psychological Abstracts (InfoPsych).
pbl Help
Finally, students are also provided extensive online help resources that contain (a) elaborated explanations of each step in
the activities, (b) a glossary of terms, (c) worked examples of each product, and (d) directions for how to use each resource
and tool. The interface of this pop-up window is similar to the interface of My Notebook (Figure 3); each category of help
resources appears as a tabbed page in a sequence of pages. This searchable resource is tightly integrated with the Student
Module Interface: when opened, the materials related to the currently active activity or tool appear highlighted and in the
main space of the pop-up window; disciplinary "jargon" appearing on activity pages is linked to definitions in a glossary;
and each activity step prompting the creation of a product or artifact is indexed to related worked examples of that product.

ACCUMULATING KNOWLEDGE & PRACTICE
Our technology-based model for reform in teacher education has, to date, only been implemented in one course; however,
the socio-technical infrastructure we are developing through a continual cyclical process of design, development, research,
and redesign has tendrils out into the community (e.g., the cooperating teachers in the local schools where our students
implement their instructional designs) and into other courses in teacher education both locally (University of Wisconsin-
Madison) and nationally (Rutgers University), vertically (courses in different semesters) and horizontally (courses within
the same  semester)   (Derry  et al., in press). Our   work  has focused   on  the simultaneous development    of a   social
infrastructure (pbl) for collaborative production and "worrying" of knowledge through the process of developing artifacts
(instructional designs), and a technical infrastructure that can support this community in a context-sensitive way. Our
current system  is in its early  intermediate  stages  and,  given the  bottom-up   needs-based approach    we  take  to its
development, will surely evolve in ways we currently do not anticipate.
An intelligent "grounded" approach to development, however, would not be possible were it not for the fact that our socio-
technical environment simultaneously serves as our research instrumentation. Behind the interfaces of our interlocking
modules is an extensive database with the capacity to generate an ever-thickening history of use (Steinkuehler et al., in
press). It is this thick history that guides our development in apt ways. Ongoing analyses of data from preliminary trials of
our environment have helped us identify community members' needs, intersections between and within system components
where we can increase the system's flexibility so that it remains community- and context-sensitive, and obstacles both
students and staff encounter when working within the context of our course. With every such trial on our system, we gain
one more  layer of description:  what  the students and staff  members   did  and  the ways in which   it was successful or
unsuccessful, the challenges community members encountered and the ways they moved beyond them, and unanticipated
issues that emerge. For better or worse, our monitoring and assessment systems traces and records nearly all user behavior,
from minutiae such as which glossary terms Individual A accessed, in what order, and for how long, to more global
information such as the percentage of students who successfully accessed the Knowledge Web. The trick is: putting all
these data in the service of current and future communities.
Our site development strategy stems from our definition of "knowledge-building communities" as those focused on the
joint production and negotiation of shared practices and artifacts: accumulate wisdom and practical skill through repeated
trials and then distribute it across resources, tools, and artifacts. The online resources we are building "artifact" our
community's accumulated wisdom; they provide newcomers (Lave 1991), whether they are researchers, students, or staff,
access to the experiential knowledge members of our community have developed over time. Students' successful solutions
are later archived as worked examples of each product that future students can access; productive research resources are
later listed for student use; learning science concepts that previously proved useful for specific problems and videocases are
compiled in a Target Group Report for tutors working with groups grappling with the same problem; frequent questions,
misconceptions, and difficulties populate resources in the Tutor Module so that instructional staff can consider the ongoing
deliberations of their current student groups in a broader historical context; and our own research on student and staff
cognition within the environment is folded back not only into the course manager resources but also into very structure of
the overall system design. In this way, we are able to provide an ever-thickening history for new members to access. Our
hope is that, in so doing, we will help foster knowledge-building communities not only horizontally within each cohort of
system users as they move through the system's activity space but also vertically among different cohorts over time.

CURRENT RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   224

We too are part of that secondary teacher education community though our participation not only as developers but also as
researchers. We are embarking on three broad strands of research: (1) tutor cognition, (2) group interaction and individual
cognitive change, and (3) longitudinal effects of our course on teacher practice. Our research on tutor cognition will include
comparisons of expert versus novice tutor performance online, tests of the effectiveness of our Tutor Module system in
scaffolding the performance of minimally trained and inexperienced staff, and development of a procedural model of what
successful tutors do during group discussion, specifying the schematic conditions that elicit tutoring moves, what tutoring
moves are made, and what results from those moves. Our plans for future research on the relationship between group
interaction and individual cognitive change include comparisons of online versus face-to-face pbl group collaboration in
order to characterize the impact of our system on group discourse, and investigation into the characteristics of the group
argumentation our system fosters and the relationships between these characteristics and individual cognitive change (as
evidenced   by  within-subject comparisons    of pre-analysis and final solution  proposals).  Our  most   extensive research
program,  studies  of the longitudinal   effects   of our course  on  teacher  practice, entails several   investigations and
comparisons: assessment of the course's impact on students' concurrent practicum experiences and subsequent student
teaching, multiple measures of students' perceptions of and attitudes toward the course, pretest/posttest comparisons and
time-series assessments of student performance, attitude, and useful knowledge (i.e., ability to transfer), and examination of
the relationship between these longitudinal data and performance on specific activities within the course.
Online technologies hold great promise for teacher education. When combined with the appropriate social structures, they
enable us to imagine wholly new forms of community and collaborative work by widening the horizon of viable models for
teacher education and professional development. In so doing, they broaden our understanding of what constitutes elusive
entities such as "learning" and "community" in the first place. Online technologies make the concrete obstacles to reform in
teacher  education --  limited     physical space, uncoordinate-able  schedules,  physical  distance,  training and   staffing
constraints, etc. -- more surmountable. Even the more subtle hurdles -- professional risk, competing discourses, etc. --
may eventually be overcome with the help of technology. Technologies "do not simply cross space and time; they also can
cross hierarchical and departmental barriers" (Sproull & Kiesler, 1991, p. ix). Accomplishing this will require substantial
time and sustained effort, yet it is our hope that the end, in this case, will be worth the effort. In the words of Michael
Fullan (1993), "You cannot have students as continuous learners and effective collaborators, without teachers having the
same characteristics" (p. 46).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by a grant from the Joyce Foundation, Sharon J. Derry, principal investigator, by the National
Institute for Science Education, a cooperative agreement between the National Science Foundation and the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, and by a grant (#REC-0107032) from the National Science Foundation's Research on Learning and
Education (ROLE) Program, Sharon J. Derry and Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver, principal investigators. The ideas expressed
herein are not endorsed by and may not be representative of positions endorsed by the sponsoring agencies. The authors are
grateful to all members   of   the STEP  community:    Kate   Hewson  for  humanizing the  interface, Matt  DelMarcelle    for
organizing the first out-of-house trial, Hakmo Koo for assuring usability for all individuals, Joan and Paul Feltovich for
their ongoing intellectual counsel, John Stampen for his organizational resolve, Youl-Kwan Sung for his substantial work
on the case interface, Julia Lee for her thoughtful critiques, Rand Spiro for his lively theoretical conversations, and Jenna
Seymour for her contributions as both tutor and researcher in the course.

REFERENCES
Ball, D. (in press). Bridging practices: Intertwining content and pedagogy in teaching and learning to teach. Journal of
         Teacher Education.
Barab S., Kling, R., & Gray, J. (in press). Introduction: Coming to terms with community. In S. Barab, R. Kling, & J. Gray
         (Eds.), Designing virtual communities in the service of learning.
Barrows, H. S. (1985). How to design a problem-based curriculum for the preclinical years. New York: Springer.
Benbunan-Fich, R. & Hiltz, S. R. (1999). Impacts of asynchronous learning networks on individual and group problem
         solving: A field experiment. Group Decision and Negotiation 8(5), 409-426.
Bonk, C. J., Hansen, E. J., Grabner-Hagen, M. M., Lazar, S. A., & Mirabelli, C. (1998). Time to "connect": Synchronous
         and   asynchronous    dialogue among    preservice teachers. In   C. J. Bonk    &  K.   S. King   (Eds.), Electronic
         collaborators: Learner-centered technologies for literacy, apprenticeship, and discourse, (pp. 289-314). Mahwah,
         NJ: Erlbaum.
Cameron, T., Barrows, H. S., & Crooks, S. M. (2000). Distributed problem-based learning at Southern Illinois University
         School of Medicine. Computer support for collaborative learning (CSCL '99): Designing new media for a new
         millennium, (pp. 86-93). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page     225

Davidson-Shivers, G., Tanner,  E., & Muilenburg,     L. (2000). Online discussion: How   do students participate?      Paper
       presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
Derry, S. J. (1996). Cognitive schema theory in the constructivist debate. Educational Psychologist, 31(3/4), 164-174.
Derry, S. J., Seymour, J., Steinkuehler, C. A., Lee, J., & Siegel, M. A. (in press). From ambitious vision to partially
       satisfying reality: An evolving socio-technical design supporting community and collaborative learning in teacher
       education. In S. Barab, R. Kling, & J. Gray (Eds.), Designing virtual communities in the service of learning.
Derry, S. J. & STEP* (2000). Reconceptualizing professional development: Collaborative video projects on the world-wide
       web. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans,
       LA. (*Kim, J. B., Steinkuehler, C. A., Siegel, M., Street, J. P., Canty, N. G., Fassnacht, C., Hewson, K., Hmelo, C.
       E. & Spiro, R.)
Derry, S. J. & STEP* (2002). The STEP system for collaborative case-based teacher education: Design, evaluation, and
       future directions. Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL '01). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. (*Siegel, M.,
       Steinkuehler, C. A., Woods, D. K., Street, J., Sung, Y.-K., Lee, J., DelMarcelle, M., Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Spiro,
       R., Feltovich, P., Koo, H., & Seymour, J.)
Eastmond, D. V. (1992). Adult distance study through computer conferencing. Distance Education, 15(1), 128-152.
Fullan, M. G. (1993). Change forces: Probing the depths of educational reform. Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Grossman, P. L. (1992). Teaching and learning with cases: Unanswered questions. In J. H. Shulman (Ed.), Case methods in
       teacher education, (pp. 227-239). New York: Teachers College Press.
Harasim, L. (1990). Online education: An environment for collaboration and intellectual amplification, Online education:
       perspectives on a new environment, (pp. 39-64). New York: Praeger Publishers.
Hewitt, J. (1997). Beyond threaded discourse. Paper presented at the Annual WebNet Conference.
Hiltz, S. R. (1986). The `virtual classroom.' Using computer-mediated communication for university teaching. Journal of
       Communication, 36(2), 96-104.
Hmelo, C. E. (1998). Problem-based learning: Effects on the early acquisition of cognitive skill in medicine. Journal of the
       Learning Sciences, 7, 173-208.
Hmelo, C. E. & Ferrari, M. (1997). The problem-based learning tutorial: Cultivating higher-order thinking skills. Journal
       for the Education of the Gifted, 20, 401-422.
Hmelo, C. E., Holton, D. L., & Kolodner, J.L. (2000). Designing to learn about complex systems. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 9, 247-298
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (in press). Knowledge Recycling: Crisscrossing the landscape of educational psychology in a problem-
       based course for preservice teachers. Journal of Excellence in College Teaching.
Hmelo-Silver, C.E. (2002). Collaborative ways of knowing: Issues in facilitation. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer Support for
       Collaborative Learning (CSCL '01). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lave, J. (1991). Situating learning in communities of practice. Perspectives on socially shared cognition, (pp. 63-82).
       Washington DC: American Psychological Association.
Loucks-Horsley, S., Hewson, P. W., Love, N., & Stiles, K. E. (1998). Designing professional development for teachers of
       science and mathematics. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the Learning
       Sciences, 3(3), 265-283.
Siegel, M. A., Derry, S. J., Steinkuehler, C. A., Kim, J.­B., & Seymour, J. (2001). What and how preservice teachers learn:
       Designing   a  course that fosters development   of useful theoretical knowledge and the assessment    methods    to
       capture it. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Seattle,
       WA.
Simon, R. L. (1992). Teaching against the grain: Texts for a pedagogy of possibility. New York: Greenwood Publishing
       Group.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J. Jacobson, M. J., & Coulson, R. L. (1991). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and hypertext:
       Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. Educational Technology,
       31(5), 24-33.
Sproull, L. & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: new ways of working in the networked organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT
       Press.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page     226

Steinkuehler, C. A.,  Derry,  S. J., Hmelo-Silver,   C. E., & DelMarcelle,  M.  (in press).  Cracking  the resource nut    with
         distributed problem-based learning in secondary teacher education. Journal of Distance Education.
STEP* (2000). Promoting teachers' flexible use of the learning sciences through case-based problem solving on the WWW:
         A   theoretical design  approach. In  B.  Fishman   &  S. O'Connor-Divelbiss  (Eds.),   Proceedings  of the     Fourth
         International Conference of the Learning Sciences, (pp. 273-279). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. (*Siegel, M., Derry, S.
         J., Kim, J., Steinkuehler, C. A., Street, J., Canty, N., Fassnacht, C., Hewson, K., Hmelo, C. E., & Spiro, R.).
Suthers, D.  (1999).  Representational   support for collaborative inquiry. Proceedings   of the  32nd Hawaii  International
         Conference on the System Sciences (HICSS-32), Maui, Hawaii: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
         Inc. (IEEE).
Suthers, D. (2000). Effects of alternative representations of evidential relations on collaborative learning discourse. In C.
         Hoadley  (Ed.),  Computer    Support for  Collaborative   Learning (CSCL   '99): Designing   new  media  for    a new
         millennium, (pp. 611-616). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wason, P. C. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1972). Psychology of reasoning: Structure and content. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.
Wertsch,  J. V.  (1991).  Voices of  the mind:   A sociocultural approach   to mediated   action. Cambridge,  MA:    Harvard
         University Press.
