Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   245

Scaffolding Group Learning in a Collaborative Networked
                                                   Environment
                                    Amy S. Wu, Rob Farrell, Mark K. Singley
                            University of Michigan         IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
                            Ann Arbor, MI 48109            Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
                            amyswu@umich.edu               {robfarr, ksingley}@us.ibm.com

ABSTRACT
Scaffolding students in a collaborative networked learning environment requires different instructional methods than in a
traditional home or classroom setting. The goal of this research is to understand computer-mediated collaboration in an
instructional setting in order to create an effective computer-mediated collaboration tool. We identify ways to support
collaboration by examining the interaction and strategies employed by a peer tutor and teacher and between peers working
in our collaborative   learning  environment.    We  found  that  supporting  collaboration  in an   electronic setting requires
diagnosing impasses, facilitating problem-solving interaction, and suggesting ways to divide the problem into sub-tasks.

Keywords
computer-mediated collaboration, tutoring, learning environments

INTRODUCTION
Proponents of collaborative learning claim that students in cooperative teams achieve higher levels of thought and retain
information longer than students who work quietly as individuals (Webb, 1995). Students learning effectively in groups
encourage each other to ask questions, articulate their thoughts, explain and justify their opinions, and elaborate and reflect
upon their   knowledge.  Yet,   the field of CSCL    (Computer-Supported   Collaborative     Learning) continues  to struggle  to
identify how best to support collaborative learning online as new communication technologies allow the learner to network
with other   learners  (Berge,  1997)  and   as  CSCL  becomes    an established    research paradigm   for  electronic learning
environments (Koschmann, 1996).
How does a collaborative networked learning environment impact the types of tutoring needed to effectively scaffold
students? We   report  on a study    that compares   peer-mediated   instruction and   teacher-mediated  instruction  to inform
scaffolding in a collaborative networked learning environment. The goal of this research is to investigate how peers and
teachers support group learning in a networked environment so in the future, we can use this model to inform the design of
electronic scaffolds for our learning environment.

THEORETICAL RATIONALE
The following sections provide a foundation and rationale for our work. A brief discussion of collaborative learning and
technology-based learning environments will establish a framework for our study.

Collaborative Learning
Many   educators   and learning  researchers   have  found promise   in Vygotsky's    (1978)  social constructivist  ideas   about
learning  in a social  setting. His  notion   of the zone   of proximal  development    (ZPD)   posits  that children's  mental
development    can be  positively   influenced  by the assistance of an  adult   or  more capable  peer. The    core concept   of
constructivism is that understanding and knowledge come from our interactions with the environment (Savery & Duffy,
1996). Studies suggest that communicating ideas in a group setting encourages self-explanation and justification, both of
significant instructional value (Rogoff, 1990; Webb, 1991)
Different groupings of learners with or without tutors have been shown to be effective in improving student achievement.
Bloom (1984) demonstrated that tutoring raises students' performance by .40 standard deviations with peer tutors and 2.0
standard deviations with experienced tutors. What strategies do experienced tutors use to facilitate learning? Graesser,
Person and Magliano (1995) documented the techniques used by to facilitate problem-solving: pumping to expose student
knowledge; prompting to supply the student with context to fill in missing information; and splicing to provide the student
with correct information when they make a mistake. Other tutoring strategies found by Graesser et. al. include hinting,
summarizing, elaborating, assessing, and providing feedback.
Research on peer interaction suggests that peers can mediate each other's learning. McCarthey and McMahon (1992) found
that in a peer-tutoring situation, the discourse tends to be unidirectional, from the more knowledgeable student to the less
knowledgeable   student.  Unfortunately,   peers may   not collaborate  effectively. Nelson-LeGall   (1992)  suggests   that with
schooling, students perceive that competition and independent performance are increasingly normative, which may account
for their failure to seek help from their peers and even from their teachers.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  246

How does working with a peer compare to working with a teacher? In comparing the effectiveness of working with experts
or peers, Salomon and Perkins (1998) note an interesting difference between expert tutoring and peer problem solving.
Whereas tutors aim to facilitate the learning of the student(s), peers working together often aim just to accomplish the task.
As a result, the individual learner often gets more of a chance to participate actively in the problem-solving effort when
interacting with an expert tutor than with same-level peers. In fact, students working in groups appear to be more focused
on finding the right answer than in mediating each other's learning (Vedder, 1985). Therefore, in many cases, an expert
tutor may be needed to support peer problem-solving. Why scaffold collaborative learning? Despite studies (e.g. Webb,
1991) showing that social learning situations correlate with a wide range of positive outcomes ­ such as improved learning,
increased productivity, and higher motivation ­ collaborative learning does not work for all learners. According to Brown
and Palincsar (1989), "social interactions do not always create new learning; peer interactions vary enormously." (p. 397).
Several researchers (King, 1994; Webb, 1995) have found that it is the nature of peer interaction that is perhaps the most
critical factor mediating individual student achievement.
The human tutoring literature shows that expert tutors can effectively support students, and that peers can mediate each
other's learning. However,    these studies of tutoring   are based  on individual tutoring situations or face-to-face group
instruction, which may not necessarily apply to networked learning. The next section explores technology-based learning
environments that can support collaborative learning.

Computer Support for Collaborative Learning
Technology  has   taken on   new roles in   learning,  providing students with the  opportunity to interact with  responsive,
dynamic environments that support learning. These computer-based interactive learning environments have traditionally
been designed to support a single student's needs. Interactive learning environments (ILEs) are commonly grounded in
constructivist theories on learning, which emphasize that knowledge is something that a student constructs based on his or
her prior knowledge and experience. ILEs are designed for a single student but may have a computer tutor to assist in
learning. Computer tutors in interactive learning environments, also known as Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS), can
diagnose the conceptual difficulties and misunderstandings of any student. Brown and VanLehn (1988) found that learning
occurs when students encounter problems, at which point they need help to repair their incorrect procedures. The tutor,
then, is able to intervene at those salient points.
CSCL environments, in addition to supporting learning of subject matter, also support students working together at a
distance or at the same computer. These systems have the potential to enhance the effectiveness of peer interactions, by
coaching peers as they work on problems and critique other students' solutions. A human or computer tutor can help
structure the interaction, give advice when needed, and promote deepening of understanding. From studies of an ITS called
Sherlock  (Lajoie &  Lesgold,   1989), Katz  and     Lesgold  (1993) believe that the tutor has three  main roles to play in
collaborative learning situations: (1) provide advice on demand, (2) provide quality control over collaborative activities,
and (3) manage peer collaboration. Our study also investigates the role of a tutor in a computer-support collaborative
learning environment, but we conduct an empirical study with human tutors to answer this question.
Our study is designed to understand the effective strategies of human tutors in a CSCL environment, in which networked
computers link the participants. What is the nature of peer and expert tutoring? How does such an environment impact the
types of tutoring needed to effectively scaffold students? The goal of our research is to determine how best to support
learning in a CSCL environment. Our long-term goal is to use the results of this study to inform our design of electronic
scaffolds for a group of students working together on tasks requiring conceptual understanding.

METHOD
We conducted a small study that examined the role of a teacher or more experienced peer with one or two other students in
a challenging problem-solving situation. We chose algebra as our subject domain because algebra provides concrete, well-
defined problems on which students can collaborate. Our existing system, ALGEBRA JAM (Singley, Fairweather & Swerling,
1999), supported collaborative problem-solving and was an appropriate environment for exploring various collaborative
arrangements.

Collaboration in ALGEBRA JAM
ALGEBRA JAM is a collaborative learning environment that supports teams of students as they collaborate synchronously
and remotely to solve situated, multi-step problems involving algebraic modeling. Students are provided with resources
containing information they need to solve an algebra word problem and given various tools to support collaboration.
The blackboard, shown in the top right of Figure 1, supports the participants as they share ideas about how to attack a
problem, and monitor team progress. They can post the variables they need to compute as nodes in the goal tree. Any
changes in the blackboard are reflected synchronously to other participants in the session; the students cannot make their
work private. To aid in collaboration, a face of the user(s) with whom a student is collaborating is displayed in a panel to
the right of the blackboard.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  247

                                     Figure 1 : ALGEBRA JAM interface
The tabbed workspace, shown in the lower right of Figure 1, is an area where students work with the various information
resources required to solve the problem. The resources are dragged from the bookshelf in the upper left corner of Figure 1.
Like the blackboard, when  one  participant   performs    an action in the tabbed  workspace   area, that action is reflected
synchronously to all other participants. This is intended to encourage collaboration in that students can work together to
write equations, perform calculations, model solutions, and evaluate each other's work.
Rather than provide  a generic chat facility, ALGEBRA      JAM  allows learners to participate in threaded  discussions tied
spatially to the work products and interface objects with which they were working. Learners communicate with one another
by typing a message while pointing to a particular object on the screen. Users can place a chat balloon anywhere on the
screen to focus their conversation or chat about a particular action or object. To further support collaboration, users must
identify the type of comment they are contributing. The goal is to encourage metacognition in students.

Participants
The participants were eighteen 8th-12th graders from summer school programs in the metropolitan New York area. The
students who participated in the same groups knew each other. The teacher was a high-school math teacher with 22 years of
teaching experience. The peer tutor was a student who also participated in our study as a (non-tutor) student and agreed to
return in the role of a tutor in subsequent experiences.

Design of Study
We placed participants in one of four experimental groups as arranged in Figure 2. We observed three sets of participants in
each condition.
         Student(s)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           page   248

                                                                      Teacher
                                                        none                              one
                                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                                            T
                                      one                                            Expert Tutoring

                                                     As        A                   A      A ks of rc arl fi EX A M · hWat W· h ta catLPodod oiEsese on:Sht"e tfatpx ermetre smr"t wmme tireana ne?nni odth wsi inac nse the? CA F CA T aS dn DI E SA c ol mu sn .     A
                            two(no roles)
                                                  Peer Collaboration               Collaboration Plus

                                                     A         A
                               two(roles)
                                                     Peer Tutoring

                                                       Figure 2: Experimental Groups

The  "Expert          Tutoring"  condition  involved  one   student  working   with   one teacher.                                                                                                                                                                     We   expected   that students  in  this
condition would regularly consult the teacher for advice and suggestions. The "Peer Collaboration" condition involved two
students working together without role assignment (i.e. neither student was told to tutor the other). We expected that when
two students were present, they would work closely, collaborating on most decisions, since they were provided tools to
support collaboration and a design that encouraged working together. "Collaboration Plus" involved two students working
with a teacher. We hypothesized that students would approach the teacher more than they would consult one another for
help. "Peer Tutoring" involved two students working together, in which one played the role of a tutor. The peer tutor had
been   given         instruction on   the problems   before assuming     the tutor role.  We                                                                                                                                                                      suspected   that the peer  tutor would   be
approached in a manner similar to how the teacher was approached.

Procedure
Prior to using the system, the participants were instructed on its features as we demonstrated a scenario between two users.
The students working together were not directed on how or when to collaborate and were merely told that they would be
working together using computers in different rooms. The students in the same groups knew each other previously. In the
"Expert  Tutoring"          and   "Collaboration  Plus"  conditions,  the    teacher  was introduced                                                                                                                                                                     as   a resource    if the student(s)
encountered difficulties. The teacher was not provided direction on how frequently to provide assistance to the student(s).
The teacher, placed in a separate room than each student, could see the events that each of the students saw on their
computer. Each group of participants was given a set of three problems to solve in one hour using the system. Each
problem involved a landscaping scenario in which students had to solve for variables such as mowing rate or the time to
complete a job. The same resources were available on the bookshelf throughout the session.

Analysis
No measures were taken to assess learning because of the short timeframe in which the participants used the system and the
design of the open-ended algebra problems. We focused on the nature of the collaboration and did not assess cognitive
gains.  From          the transcripts of  the chats, we  analyzed    the  manner   in which   the                                                                                                                                                                    human    tutors offered   assistance and
responded to student successes and struggles. We also coded the participants' actions and decisions so we could identify
general  strategies        and   techniques   employed  by  peer   tutors and  teachers   when                                                                                                                                                                       students encountered   difficulties. We
identified types of feedback offered by a tutor and calculated the number of times a tutor mediated the problem-solving
effort.

FINDINGS
We present our findings at two levels. First, we examine the collaboration, or the flow of information, that occurred
between participants in ALGEBRA JAM. We begin by looking at how often learning is mediated and by whom. Then, we
discuss how the participants mediated each other's learning.
Modeling information flow
Information flow is defined as the sharing of meaningful, relevant information that assists in completing the task. We have
modeled the information flow between participants in each condition to summarize our findings in Figure 3. The data to
       Student(s)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page  249

support these diagrams is discussed in the following sections. We had expected to see arrows between the two students in
the collaboration conditions, but no useful information was exchanged between peers.
                                                                           Teacher
                                                none                                       One

                                 one                                         A      ExpeArt Tutoring

                       two(no roles)       Peer ACsollaboratioAn           A       CollaboAration Plus

                           two(roles)       PeAer TutorinAg

                                                 Figure 3: Observed information flow
In the "Tutor mediation" tables in this section (Tables 1, 2, and 3), we list the number of problems which the student(s)
attempted, the total number of times the teacher intervened during the session, the percentage of interventions solicited by
the student, and the percentage of interventions initiated by the teacher during that session. "Peer Collaboration" does not
have a table since no tutor participated in that condition.

Expert Tutoring
In "Expert Tutoring", the students regularly consulted the teacher for advice and suggestions. Most of the information was
flowing from the teacher to the student, as illustrated in Passage 1.
                    Tutor: Good, now how many more minutes is the first time besides 120?
                    Timmy: So is it 120.15?
                    Tutor: 120 minutes + 15 minutes =
                    Timmy: 135
                                        Passage 1: Information directed from teacher to student
In the "Expert Tutoring" condition, most of the interaction involved the problem-solving process. On average, the student
solicited approximately 45% of the teacher interventions in this condition; 55% were initiated by the teacher. Only one of
the three         students progressed past the first problem.     Table   2 shows  that his session    was the only one  in which the
percentage of solicited interventions was greater than the percentage of tutor-initiated interventions.
       Expert                Problems                Tutor             Student-Solicited                 Tutor-Initiated
     Tutoring               Attempted         Interactions               Interactions n(%)             Interactions n(%)
     Group 1                          1                    13                     6(46.1)                       7(53.8)
     Group 2                          2                     9                     5(55.5)                       4(44.4)
     Group 3                          1                     9                     3(33.3)                       6(66.7)
     Average                       1.3                   10.3                   4.7(45.0)                      5.7(55.0)
                                            Table 1: Tutor mediation for "Expert Tutoring"

Peer Collaboration
In "Peer Collaboration", where neither student was more knowledgeable than the other, the pair worked independently even
when collaboration would have been more efficient. Students would do their own work, as evidenced by Passage 2 from
our chat transcripts. We also saw in this condition the students were extremely off task.
                    Thomas: Did you do the problem?
                    Nick: I'll call you back in a minute
                    Thomas: Did you finish?
                    Nick: I'm going to try to finish the last problem...
Passage 2: Lack of peer mediation

Collaboration Plus
In "Collaboration Plus", where a teacher and a same-level peer are present for consultation, we found that neither the
teacher nor the peer were asked directly for help. The teacher decides when to intervene to guide or redirect the students.
The students did not share useful information, although they did interact more with a teacher present than they did in the
"Peer Collaboration" condition without a teacher. They usually only interacted to encourage each other or put each other
down, as in Passage 3.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  250

             Tutor: You have total acres and total hours. How do you get the rate?
             Aaron: Ohhhhh my bad.
             Brandon: Yes it is your bad.
             Aaron: Shut up. I didn't hear you come up with some answer, Mr. I-know-it-all.
Passage 3: Peer interaction in "Collaboration Plus"
Sometimes, students would lead each other down the wrong path and the teacher would intervene. With multiple students,
the teacher, instead of being solicited by the learner(s) as in "Expert Tutoring", initiates more of the mediation. Table 2
shows that a large percentage (90% average) of the tutor mediation in "Collaboration Plus" was tutor-initiated, compared to
Table 2 in "Expert Tutoring" which showed tutor-initiated interactions averaging 55%.
   Collaboration         Problems                   Tutor         Student-Solicited             Tutor-Initiated
             Plus       Attempted            Interactions         Interactions n(%)         Interactions n(%)
         Group 1    1                   17                 1(5.9)                       16(94.1)
         Group 2    3                   10                 1(10.0)                      9(90.0)
         Group 3    1                   15                 2(13.3)                      13(86.7)
        Average     1.3                 14.0               1.3(9.7)                     12.7(90.3)

                                   Table 2: Tutor mediation for "Collaboration Plus"

Peer Tutoring
In "Peer Tutoring", the peer tutor was consulted in a similar fashion to the teacher in "Expert Tutoring". No fewer questions
were asked than in the condition where a teacher was present. The peer tutor seemed to be an adequate substitute for the
teacher in terms of answering questions and directing students. The following transcript passage, Passage 4, is an example
of effective guidance by a peer-tutor.
        Peer Tutor: No...what are u trying to find in the "Phillip" book?
       Tremaine: The amount of acres that he mows per hour
       Peer Tutor: Yes...his average rate of lawn mowing. How does one find an average?
       Tremaine: Divide
                                             Passage 4:Effective peer tutoring
Information was directed from the tutor to the student, just as we saw in the "Expert Tutoring" condition. As shown in
Table 3, our data set demonstrates that a peer, with a lower average number of interactions, intervenes slightly less than a
teacher. The average number of interactions between the teacher and the student was 10.3 in the Expert Tutoring condition
(as shown in Table 2), as opposed to an average of 8.7 interactions in this condition.
        Peer         Problems                Tutor           Student-Solicited               Tutor-Initiated
    Tutoring        Attempted          Interactions          Interactions n(%)            Interactions n(%)
     Group 1                 1                   9                        5(55.6)                    4(44.4)
     Group 2                 2                   7                        2(28.6)                    5(71.4)
     Group 3                 1                  10                        1(10.0)                    9(90.0)
     Average                1.7                8.7                     2.7(31.4)                   6.0(68.6)
                                        Table 3: Tutor mediation for "Peer Tutoring"

Summary of Information Flow Findings
From studying  the flow  of information    between  participants, we found   that  when   a teacher or peer  tutor is present,
information is directed from the tutor to the student. In contrast, in "Peer Collaboration" where another same-level peer was
available for help, students did not exchange useful information with each other to mediate the learning process; the teacher
initiated almost all the interaction in that condition. When two peers are working together with or without the presence of a
tutor, the peers work independently and do not mediate each other's learning.

Instructional Strategies
We coded the types of strategies used by tutors, and we found five categories that are derived from Graesser and his
colleagues' (1995) categories. We did not code the "Pure Collaboration" condition because we did not observe information
flow between the students in those groups. The types of mediation we coded were leading, prompting, hinting, probing, and
diagnosing. Figure 4  categorizes the   percentage  of interventions by   both a  teacher and   a peer-tutor according to the
instructional strategies they employed.
                               % of Mediation

                                                   Leading
                                                             Prompting
                                                                         Hinting
                                                                                   Probing
                                                                                             Diagnosing
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                       page 251

                                                  Tutor Mediation Within Each Condition

                                              50
                                              40
                                              30                                                            Expert Tutoring
                                                                                                            Collaboration Plus
                                              20
                                                                                                            Peer Tutoring
                                              10
                                               0

                                                  Figure 4: Instructional strategies graph

Leading
Leading differs from prompting in that in a leading strategy, the tutor is specifically directing a student to complete a task.
Leading would mean answering a question such that it solves part of the problem, as illustrated in Passage 5. Peer tutors did
almost twice as much leading as did teachers. A teacher used similar strategies whether working with one student or two
simultaneously.
            Timmy: I don't know how to figure that out
            Tutor: The last column is acres divided by hour. That would be how much work Phillip did in 1 hour.
                                                Passage 5: Example of leading by a teacher

Prompting
In prompting, tutors (either a peer or teacher) ask questions so that the student can arrive at the answer himself or herself. In
Passage 6, the teacher is prompting the student to a particular answer. Prompting is the strategy that the teacher and peer
tutor used most often when mediating learning.
            Tutor: Where would we find the information we need?
            Timmy: Phillip's timesheet
            Tutor: Good, now what does this tell us?
            Timmy: How many hours Phil worked
            Tutor: Ok, and what else?
                                                    Passage 6: Example of prompting

Hinting
Hinting differs from prompting in that hints usually take the form of analogies or reminders and may not relate specifically
to the problem. Passage 7 illustrates hinting. The teacher employed the hinting strategy more often that did the peer tutor.
            Tutor: Remember what rate is?
            Timmy: Is it the consistency of something?
            Tutor: Heart rate we defined as the amount of work that your heart does in a given time.
            Tutor: So Phillip's rate would be ________?
                                                           Passage 7: Example of hinting

Probing
Probing involves the tutor asking questions to make sure a student understands the problem, as in Passage 8. A peer tutor
seems to do less probing than a teacher to make sure an idea or concept is understood.
            Tutor: You already did his total acres so we just need the total time.
            Timmy: 19.669 acres in 19.669 total time
            Tutor: How did you get 19.669 for total time?
                                                     Passage 8: Example of probing
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page 252

Diagnosing
Diagnosing is a strategy in which tutors provide feedback by evaluating the student's ideas and actions in the learning
environment. As illustrated in Passage 9, diagnosing provides the student with immediate input about their progress. In our
study, a teacher did more diagnosing than a peer tutor.
              Tutor: You are correct ­ John has mowed 15.75 acres before.
              Tutor: You are also right that there are 60 minutes in an hour.
                                               Passage 9: Example of diagnosing

Summary
Primarily, human tutors in a learning environment take the learner through the problem by asking questions pertaining to
the problem at hand. The teacher did less probing and diagnosing and more leading and hinting in the "Expert Tutoring"
condition than in the "Collaboration Plus" condition. It also appears that a peer tutor prefers prompting followed by leading
to mediate student learning. Overall, we found that the notion that a problem-solving partner is more knowledgeable,
regardless of his or her status or teaching experience, seems to provide a student with more inclination to ask questions of
the partner than in the case where the partner is a same-level student.

DISCUSSION
We had hypothesized that students in the "Expert Tutoring" condition would consult the teacher regularly for advice and
suggestions. We saw in Table 2 that a student initiated more of the interaction in the case when he or she was able to solve
a problem, whereas the teacher initiated more of the interaction when the student was struggling. This would be a logical
result of students not knowing when to ask for assistance or what types of questions to ask. In responding to the student, we
found that the teacher used prompting most frequently, followed by hinting. It seemed that the teacher expected the students
to find the answers on their own with some direction.
We had hypothesized that students would work as equals in the "Peer Collaboration" condition, working together since they
were information resources for each other in the environment. But the students had no prior training in how to collaborate
and were    not given   explicit instructions on how to work  together.  Perhaps  as   a result, they proceeded  as   individual
problem-solvers;   there  was    no shared knowledge. Even    though the  participants   in this condition were  not  complete
strangers, they needed support in working together.
We had expected in the "Collaboration Plus" condition that we would see the teacher being consulted more often than the
other student. However, in most cases, questions or remarks would not be addressed to either participant, and the teacher
would be responsible for initiating the interaction. In "Collaboration Plus," the instructional strategies used by the teacher
were primarily prompting, followed closely by diagnosing. We also noticed that the teacher aimed to facilitate the learning
of the student, whereas the peer often aimed just to find the right answer. Furthermore, when students did interact, they
often misdirected each other or moved off-task, requiring teacher intervention. This is more evidence that the collaboration
process needs to be scaffolded in a networked environment.
Lastly, we believed that a peer tutor would be approached online by a student in a similar manner to a teacher. We found
that the tutor initiated interaction more often than the student asked for assistance. Because of the nature of the task and the
differences in expertise, the tutor assumes more of a traditional teacher role and thus dominates the dialogue. Unlike when
the teacher was acting as the tutor, we found that the peer tutor almost half the time chose the more straightforward, simple
instructional method of prompting, followed a quarter of the time by leading, another less sophisticated approach, to help a
student.

IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSION
We conclude by returning to our research questions. How does a CSCL learning environment impact the types of support
needed   to effectively  scaffold   students? Which  elements of peer   interaction and   teacher  interaction are effective in
supporting collaborative learning? We cannot make strong claims due to the size of our study, but our results suggest
interesting areas for further exploration.

Design Implications
We noted general design implications from tutor-mediated instruction for designing support for groups of students working
in electronic learning environments. In "Expert Tutoring," we saw that the teacher initiated more of the interaction when
the student was struggling. Support for group learning should diagnose student progress and intervene at impasses. This is
consistent  with   the findings  of Brown   and  VanLehn (1988)  described    earlier. A  human   or  computer  tutor does   not
necessarily need to provide immediate feedback, but a model tracing student progress could ensure that students do not get
too far off track.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  253

Scaffolds in CSCL environments should also improve communication between students to accelerate their path along an
acceptable solution trajectory. We saw in the "Peer Collaboration" condition that students proceeded as individual problem
solvers with little useful information shared between them. As suggested earlier in this paper, discussing and explaining
ideas to peers is a useful learning strategy. This suggests that supporting collaboration requires (1) diagnosing impasses to
redirect incorrect solution paths, (2) facilitating problem-solving interaction to keep students engaged, and (3) suggesting
ways to divide the problem into sub-tasks for which each participant can be responsible. These functions are somewhat
similar to the findings by Katz and Lesgold (1993) of the role of the tutor in a collaborative situation, except that our results
suggest that the tutor in a CSCL environment needs to be more pro-active in providing advice. Rather than leaving to
students the responsibility for deciding when advice is needed, we believe the tutor needs to identify problems and provide
redirection.
Finding the optimal balance of peer and expert tutoring strategies is an important research challenge. There are times when
a knowledgeable    expert is   needed, and other  times  when  a  peer, to which  ideas   can be explained   and justified,  is
appropriate. Our  study suggests,  however,  that peers   need to be instructed  on how   to  collaborate before they can   be
effective at facilitating each other's learning. Experts also need to give students the chance to work together and correct
each other before jumping in with the solution.

Conclusion
More research needs to be done to examine how traditional methods of tutoring differ when the participants are interacting
over a computer. More studies should also explore how students learn differently with peers versus teachers in an electronic
environment. This study demonstrated that the techniques used to scaffold learning in a CSCL environment are different
from interactive learning environments. Not only does individual learning need to be supported, but the interaction between
participants needs to be facilitated because outside of the social context of the classroom, it is easy for the students to
become disengaged.
We have performed a small study that has looked more generally at the role of peers, a knowledgeable peer-tutor and a
teacher put  into an electronic  tutoring  situation. Our findings suggest  that there  are  significant  advantages for both
knowledge-rich    interactions and peer-to-peer collaboration.  Designers  of collaborative   learning environments   need  to
capture these advantages by developing scaffolds that can effectively lead, prompt, hint, probe, and diagnose in a way that
supports team problem-solving without actively leading the team towards a predetermined outcome.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by IBM T.J. Watson Research Center. We would like to thank Elizabeth Davis and Nichole
Pinkard for their feedback and suggestions. We also thank the participants in this study.

REFERENCERS
Berge, Z. (1997). Computer conferencing and the on-line classroom. International Journal of Educational
      Telecommunications, 3(1): 3-21.
             Brown, A., & Palincsar, A.S. (1989). Guided, cooperative learning and individual knowledge acquisition. In L.
        Resnick (Ed.) Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 393-451). Hillsdale,
                                                                                                          NJ: Erlbaum.
Brown, J. and VanLehn, K. (1988). Repair theory: A generative theory of bugs in procedural skills.     Readings in cognitive
      science: A perspective from psychology and artificial intelligence.  San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
          Cobb, P. (1994). Where is the mind? Constructivist and sociocultural perspectives on mathematical development.
                                                                               Educational Researcher, 23(7): 13-20.
                          Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the Collaborative Experience of Learning. London: Routledge.
Gall, S. (1992). Children's Instrumental Help-Seeking: Its Role in the Social Acquisition and Construction of Knowledge.
      In R.  Hertz-Lazarowitz,   V. Kirkus, & N. Miller (Eds.) Interactions in Cooperative Groups.  New York:    Cambridge
      University Press.
             Graesser, A.C., Person, N.K., & Magliano, J.P. (1995). Collaborative dialog patterns in naturalistic one-on-one
                                                                  tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9: 359-387.
        King, A. (1994). Guiding knowledge construction in the classroom: Effects of teaching children how to question and
                                              how to explain. American Educational Research Journal, 30: 338-368.
             Koschmann, T. (1996). CSCL:Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
                                                                                                           Associates.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 254

Lepper, M, Woolverton, M., Mumme,    D., & Gurtner, J. (1993). Motivational Techniques  of Expert Human Tutors.  In S.P.
      Lajoie and S.J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as Cognitive Tools. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McCarthey, S. & McMahon, S. (1992). From Convention to Invention: Three Approaches to Peer Interactions During
      Writing. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz,  V. Kirkus, & N.  Miller (Eds.) Interactions in Cooperative Groups. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.
Newman, R., & Goldin, L. (1990).   Children's reluctance to seek help with schoolwork. Journal of Educational
      Psychology, 82, 71-80.
               Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York: Oxford
                                                                                                University Press.
       Salomon, G., & Perkins, D.N. (1998). Individual and Social Aspects of Learning. In P.D. Pearson & A. Iran-Nejad
                                                                      (Eds.), Review of Research in Education. 23.
Singley, M.K., Fairweather, P., & Swerling, S. (1999). Team Tutoring Systems: Reifying Roles in Problem Solving.   In
      Proceedings of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, Palo Alto, CA, 538-548.
         Van der Miej, H. (1988).   Constraints on question-asking in classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80,
                                                                                                     401-405.
      Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
                                                                                                University Press.
         Webb, N.M. (1995). Constructive Activity and Learning in Collaborative Small Groups. Journal of Educational
                                                                                       Psychology, 87(3): 406-423.
Webb, N.M. (1991). Task related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small groups. Journal forResearch in
       Mathematics Education, 22 (5).
Wood, D., Bruner, J. & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and
       Psychiatry, 17(2), 89-100.
