Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  255

    Why Scaffolding Should Sometimes Make Tasks More
                                       Difficult for Learners
                                                    Brian J. Reiser
                                               Northwestern University
                                               Reiser@northwestern.edu
ABSTRACT
There has been much interest in using software tools to scaffold learners in complex tasks, that is, to provide supports that
enable students to deal with more complex content and skill demands than they could otherwise handle. Many different
approaches to scaffolding techniques have been presented in a broad range of software tools. I discuss two mechanisms to
explain how software tools can scaffold learners. Software tools can help structure the learning task, guiding learners
through key components and supporting their planning and performance. In addition, tools can shape students' performance
and understanding of the task in terms of key disciplinary content and strategies, thereby problematizing this important
content. While making the task more difficult in the short term, by forcing learners to address these ideas, such scaffolded
tools make this work more productive opportunities for learning.
Keywords
caffolding, interactive learning environments, science education
INTRODUCTION
There  is much   interest in education reform   in using technology  to  support  learners. One  aspect  of the argument     for
technology has been that software can be used to scaffold students, that is to provide enough support to enable learners to
succeed in more complex tasks, and thereby to extend the range of experiences from which they can learn (Davis & Linn,
2000; Edelson, Gordin, & Pea, 1999; Guzdial, 1994; Quintana, Eng, Carra, Wu, & Soloway, 1999; Reiser et al., 2001).
Scaffolding is a key element of the notion of cognitive apprenticeship, in which students can learn by taking increasing
responsibility and  ownership   for their role  in complex   problem    solving, with the   structure and  guidance   of more
knowledgeable mentors or teachers (Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989).
There are many different approaches to scaffolding, and no common framework has yet emerged that can be used to
provide design guidelines for scaffolded software. In this paper, I propose two general mechanisms by which software tools
can shape  tasks for learners  in a way   that makes  their problem  solving more    productive, and   thereby scaffolds  their
learning.

Traditional Approaches to Scaffolding
The term scaffolding has traditionally been used to refer to the process by which a teacher or more knowledgeable peer
assists a learner, altering the learning task so the student can solve problems or perform tasks that would otherwise be out of
reach. The conception is associated with Vygotsky's notion of the zone of proximal development, which characterizes the
region of tasks between what the learner could accomplish alone and what he or she could accomplish (and master) with
assistance (Rogoff, 1990; Vygotsky, 1978). It is important to stress the dual aspects of both (a) accomplishing the task and
(b) learning from one's efforts, i.e., improving one's performance on the future tasks in the process. If learners are assisted
in the task but are not able to understand or take advantage of the experience, the assistance will have been local to that
instance of scaffolding, but will not have provided support for learning. Thus, scaffolding entails a delicate negotiation
between   providing support  while  continuing  to engage   the learner actively in the process  (Merrill,  Reiser, Merrill, &
Landes, 1995).
In recent design research on interactive learning environments, this notion of scaffolding has been generalized to refer to
aspects of software tools that assist the learners in making progress on what would otherwise be tasks out of their reach.
Software scaffolding provides some sort of structure that helps make the learning more tractable for learners. For example,
the software might provide prompts to encourage or remind students what steps to take (Davis & Linn, 2000), graphical
organizers or other notations to help students plan and organize their problem solving (Quintana et al., 1999), automatic
execution of lower level processes, or representations that help learners track the steps they have taken in the problem
solving process (Collins & Brown, 1988; Koedinger & Anderson, 1993). In all these cases the software provides additional
assistance beyond what a simpler, more basic tool would have provided, to allow learners to accomplish more ambitious
tasks.
This work on scaffolded software tools has been very encouraging, and promises to be an important benefit in integrating
technological tools into classrooms. However, there have been a wide range of approaches to designing software scaffolds,
and almost as many design principles as there are working systems. Development of general guidelines for the design of
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   256

software scaffolds first requires a general theoretical framework to characterize how tools can scaffold learners. How can
we characterize the mechanisms by which software scaffolds assist learners?
There are a number of different ways one could carve up the space of software scaffolds. We could attempt to organize
scaffolds  according  to  the  nature of   the interface  feature  involved, such  as      text-based prompts,   or  hyperlinked
representations. We could enumerate different functions scaffolds can serve, such as linking representations or helping
learners break down complex processes into their subcomponents. Such analyses have clear utility. However, a principled
articulation of scaffolding approaches must begin with a model of the task and the identification of the obstacles that
learners face in performing the task (Quintana, 2001; Quintana et al., 1999; Reiser et al., 2001). A delineation of scaffolding
strategies must be based on an analysis of what the target domain requires of learners, why the task is difficult, and finally
how interacting with the tools can help learners overcome these difficulties, both to accomplish the task and to learn more
effectively from the experience.
In this paper, I argue that there are two principal mechanisms by which software scaffolds can assist learners in mastering
complex   tasks. Following discussion   of these   two scaffolding  mechanisms,  I present     some   specific design  principles
consistent with this model, and describe their implementation in learning environments. To construct this argument, I will
focus on scaffolding in the discipline of science. Much of the work on scaffolding tools has taken place in this domain, and
there is a rich literature on the obstacles learners face. Furthermore, tools to access and interpret data are a central part of
scientific investigations, so this domain is a productive context in which to explore the design of scaffolded tools.

THE NEEDS OF LEARNERS
Modern instructional approaches in science and mathematics emphasize learning by engaging in knowledge construction
practices. In the case of science, this entails learning in the context of scientific investigation and argumentation (Edelson,
2001;  Olson   &  Loucks-Horsley,  2000;   Singer,  Marx,  Krajcik, &  Chambers,   2000).      These  investigations often entail
students learning general principles in the context of specific problem scenarios. Designers have developed approaches of
problem-based learning (Cognition and Technology Group, 1990; Schank, Fano, Bell, & Jona, 1994; Williams, 1992) and
project-based science (Blumenfeld et al., 1991) as a way of engaging learners in acquiring disciplinary knowledge in the
context of solving particular problems, such as learning genetics by working through the tasks of being a genetic counselor
(Bell, Bareiss, & Beckwith, 1994) or learning introductory physics by analyzing the quality of air in one's community
(Singer et al., 2000). These approaches, while providing the potential to connect knowledge more effectively to real world
contexts, also pose a particular type of challenge for learners. For this approach to be successful as a learning approach,
students must not only construct solutions to the particular scenario, but must construct and analyze their solutions in terms
of more general disciplinary content. In particular, students need to ground their reasoning in more general disciplinary
strategies, and connect the explanations or arguments they construct to more general disciplinary frameworks. For example,
if students are learning about mass and density by designing toy boats to carry loads, they need to analyze and synthesize
their results and  work  toward  physical  explanations,  rather than focusing only on       the goal of the   boat-building task
(Schauble, Klopfer, & Raghavan, 1991).
Performing an investigation is a complex cognitive task that pushes the boundary of learners' content knowledge and
processes. For example, the current education standards characterize the iterative processes of designing an investigation,
collecting data,  constructing and revising    explanations  based  on data,  evaluating     explanations, and   communicating
arguments (Olson & Loucks-Horsley, 2000). This requires coordinating domain-specific processes and content knowledge,
and metacognitive processes to plan, monitor, evaluate and revise these investigation plans. Thus, learners face challenges
at several levels. The   knowledge students    are mastering includes  conceptual  knowledge,      basic domain  process   skills,
domain-specific strategies, and more general metacognitive processes.
Along with efforts to bring more ambitious science practices into classrooms, there has now been a rich set of empirical
studies documenting the challenges that learners face. We briefly consider the main findings here in order to motivate the
nature of  the solutions that scaffolds can  provide   to these problems. Where   does     the complexity  arise for  learners in
science?
Tacit expert knowledge: Sophisticated problem solvers relies on strategies for planning and guiding the reasoning. These
heuristic strategies in science are needed to plan investigations, select data comparisons, and synthesize findings. These
strategies are built upon on discipline-specific explanatory frameworks (Reiser et al., 2001; Tabak, Smith, Sandoval, &
Reiser, 1996). A key challenge is that this knowledge is typically tacit for more experienced reasoners, and very much
taken for granted. Instruction often fails to make these strategies explicit for learners.
Non-reflective work: Learners tend to focus on products rather than on explanatory and learning goals (Perkins, 1998;
Schauble, Glaser, Duschl, Schulze, & John, 1995). The difficulty in managing investigations leads to little attention being
given to reflection and reevaluation (Loh et al., 2001). Lack of content knowledge further complicates the process of
evaluating the progress of an investigation.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  257

Fragile and superficial understanding. Learners tend to focus on surface details, and have difficulty seeing the underlying
structure (Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). They may have difficulty mapping between related representations and instead
become overly reliant on particular forms.
In summary, the task demands of engaging in scientific investigations reveal a system of challenges for learners. The
ongoing cycle of planning and monitoring, sense making, and communication requires a number of processes that are likely
contexts where assistance will be needed. Investigations require planning, in which students need to coordinate reasoning
about hypotheses and reasoning about experiments or data comparisons that can be constructed to test hypotheses (Klahr &
Dunbar, 1988). Constructing and pursuing that plan requires new disciplinary strategies, and poses metacognitive demands
in continually monitoring, evaluating and revising that plan. In addition to help in managing this process, learners may need
assistance in thinking through their own solutions in terms of the disciplinary content, so that they can learn about the
discipline from the experience. Making sense of the data collected may require deep subject matter knowledge to interpret
observations in light of disciplinary frameworks. Learners may need prompting to consider alternatives in light of initial
support for a line of argument. They may need assistance in exploring the implications of the evidence they collect for the
hypotheses they consider. They may not articulate their ongoing understanding, focusing instead on pragmatic goals of
creating required products. They may need assistance in scientific discourse to move beyond description and communicate
a scientific argument. In all these processes, the challenges of more superficial understanding, lack of access to tacit expert
strategies, and a tendency toward non-reflective work create the need and opportunities for more supportive environments.

HOW CAN TOOLS HELP LEARNERS?
While traditional views of scaffolding have focused on social interactions as the source of assistance, the focus of the last
two decades of research on the cognitive science issues in technology design has illuminated ways in which technological
tools may provide some types of scaffolding functions. In considering how to help learners with these challenges, it is
important to reconceptualize the learning problem from that of an individual working on tasks, perhaps with assistance of
another more knowledgeable other, to focusing on the context in which the people are acting, the tools they use, and the
knowledge embedded in this context. Rather than considering what the individual can accomplish, this view of distributed
cognition focuses on what the system of person and tool can accomplish (Hollan, Hutchins, & Kirsh, 2000). The structure
of a tool shapes how one interacts with the task and affects what can be accomplished.
One clear possibility for more supportive tools lies in automating aspects of tasks, and thereby restricting the part of the
task for the learner needs to perform, potentially enabling them to focus on more productive parts of the tasks (Salomon,
Perkins, & Globerson, 1991). This is the perhaps the most straightforward sense of scaffolding. For example, calculators
can  offload simple    computations, allowing people  to    focus  on other  parts of the data  manipulation  tasks, such as
considering what calculations to compose together to solve a problem. Word processors with spelling checkers can allow
writers to focus more on the construction of their prose rather than devoting time to checking spelling in dictionaries. If
offloading these aspects of the task enable learners to focus more effectively on the conceptually important aspects, and
thereby learn from their experience, the tool has scaffolded that learning.
Tools can have even more dramatic effects on tasks in the way they shape the task itself. In fact, the nature of the tools we
use can be a critical factor in how people think about the tasks they perform (Hutchins, 1995; Norman, 1987). This is
particularly true when   tasks involve accessing, manipulating,    storing, or reasoning  about information. Norman   (1987)
describes cognitive artifacts, or tools that are used to represent and manipulate information in a task. These tools can
change the task in fundamental ways. The cognitive artifact becomes the vehicle through which the person interacts with
the environment. It provides the representation of external states and the vehicle for manipulating the environment. Because
of the central role of tools in effecting actions in information domains, the task cannot really be defined independent of the
tools people use in the practice of that task (Bannon & Bødker, 1987). Thus, the nature of the task emerges from the
interactions of people, subject matter, and tools, and the nature of the tool clearly affects how tractable the performance of a
task is for learners.
Norman describes the problem of mapping between the external representation and what it represents. The goal of human-
computer interaction design research is to make that mapping as transparent as possible. Cognitive artifacts can change the
task for users in  the  way in  which  they represent and    allow people   to manipulate information. For   example, direct-
manipulation interfaces allow users to control a process by appearing to act upon it directly, through the visual metaphor
(Hutchins, Hollan, & Norman, 1986). Visualization tools are designed to help users form deep models of an underlying
system (Hollan, Bederson, & Helfman, 1997).
In the design of scaffolded tools, we can use this mapping to our advantage. Rather than striving only for transparency
between the representation and the world it represents, we can bend that representation to instructional purposes. Cognitive
artifacts provide a lever for designers to shape how learners think about tasks. In the next section, we consider how
cognitive artifacts can be used to instructional advantage.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   258

MECHANISMS OF SCAFFOLDING: STRUCTURE AND PROBLEMATIZE
How can tools provide scaffolding? First, let us revisit the definition of scaffolding as applied to science. There are two
critical notions in scaffolding: (1) learners receive assistance to succeed in more complex tasks that would otherwise be too
difficult; (2) learners draw from that experience and improve in process skills and/or content understanding. Focusing on
the representational properties of tools puts us in a position now to consider how the specific design of the tool can support
learning tasks.
I propose two complementary aspects of scaffolding in software tools -- it can help structure problem solving, and it can
provoke learners to devote resources to issues they might not otherwise address. We consider each of these in turn.
Structuring the Task
The first sense of scaffolding is the most straightforward -- if reasoning is difficult due to complexity or the open-ended
nature of the task, then one way to help learners is to make the task more structured. This may be done by providing
structured workspaces, graphical organizers, decomposing functionality according to conceptual processes, or providing
prompts. The structure of the tool may provide guidance as to what actions to take, their order, necessary aspects of work
products, and so on. This type of structuring is a key characteristic of a number of different scaffolding approaches. For
example, in KIE, structured prompts reminds students of aspects of the process they may otherwise neglect to perform
(Davis & Linn, 2000). Model-It structures the task of modeling into plan, build, and test processes, and organizes relevant
functions in each of those modes (Jackson, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1998). In the BGuILE ExplanationConstructor, structured
workspaces can be used to remind students of the necessary components of their explanations, and can remind students
about the criteria they should apply to evaluate their own work (Reiser et al., 2001; Sandoval, 1998). In these cases, the
scaffolded tool addresses the obstacles of the investigation task by helping learners construct their plans, consider the
possible actions relevant to each stage of the process, monitor the plan, and tie in relevant disciplinary ideas as they make
sense and communicate about their data.

Problematizing Concepts
The second general approach is to make something in students' work more problematic (Hiebert et al., 1996). That is, the
software tools help students see something as problematic that they might otherwise overlook. Rather than simplifying the
task, the software forces students to encounter important ideas or processes. For example, if students are forced to use a
menu   to categorize  the data they have  collected,  they need    to consider the  significance  of the data.  In  the BGuILE
ExplanationConstructor (Sandoval, 1998), students must make conceptual distinctions between the type of argument they
wish to construct. In these cases, forcing students to apply these distinctions, which represent key conceptual ideas in the
target discipline, can provoke debate, deliberations, and decisions that are all productive for students as they make sense of
the findings of their investigation and manage its progress.
In this way, scaffolds can provoke students, "rocking the boat" when they are proceeding along without being mindful
enough of the rich connections of their decisions to the domain content. This provocation may occur as the tools force them
into decisions or commitments required to use the vocabulary and machinery of the interface. This type of scaffolded tool
may create short-term costs, preventing students from rushing through their work in a problem without being mindful of the
subject-matter issues that are the goal of the instruction. While this may be a short-term challenge rather than directly
assisting with more expeditious solutions, such a tool may make the students' efforts in the problem a more productive
learning opportunity.
The social context of collaborative problem solving is often integral to the problematizing nature of the tool. Students must
make   their understanding  public when   using tools that   represent conceptual   distinctions explicitly. Such   tools require
students to discuss disciplinary ideas decisions in order to effect actions in the tool. In this way, the artifact students use to
examine data and record their interpretations becomes a vehicle for negotiation of understanding about the disciplinary
ideas and their application to the task at hand (Roschelle, 1992).
These two mechanisms of structuring and problematizing are often complementary. The same characteristic of a tool
designed to help structure students' engagement in a task, for example, by providing guiding prompts or making explicit a
set of subtasks, may  also  problematize  the disciplinary   ideas, by requiring students to make    sense   of the options  and
connect their own work to these disciplinary ideas.
In summary, through these two mechanisms, scaffolds can help learners overcome some of the challenge of the complexity
in the domain. Their work can be more productive and more effectively guided by expert strategies and understanding. In
the  next  section we   provide   examples  from  our  work    on     BGuILE   learning environments     that   exemplify  these
complementary functions of guiding and problematizing in students' scientific investigations.

DESIGN PRINCIPLES: USING TOOLS TO MAKE THE TASK EXPLICIT
The  design  principles I present  here address the  learner obstacles   of fragile understanding    and accessing  tacit  expert
knowledge. The key to the design approach is to help make the structure of the task more accessible to learners through the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page  259

tools they use  and  the artifacts they create. Articulation  plays  a central  role in  the  approach.   We  will help  learners
understand  the  tasks by   requiring them  to  articulate their actions  and  encode   their results  in terms of  disciplinary
frameworks.
I  will present two   types  of designs  that attempt   to help  students understand    and   practice these  investigation   and
argumentation strategies by making them explicit in both the tools students use and the work products or artifacts they
create. We call these strategic tools and strategic artifacts (Reiser et al., 2001). I describe these two types of design features
and then present examples of scaffolded tools that employ these strategies.
Strategic Tools: We structure the tools students use to access, analyze, and manipulate data so that the implicit strategies of
the discipline are visible to students. When students interact with these tools they are led to articulate their interaction in
terms of these strategies. For example, when students construct data queries they articulate their query in terms of the key
distinctions in the types of comparisons used to build theory in the domain, rather than solely in terms of surface data
parameters.
Strategic Artifacts: We design the work products that students create to represent the important conceptual properties of
explanations and models in the discipline. For example, we have students construct hypermedia documents that make
explicit the rhetorical structure of their arguments.

Figure 1. The query screen from The Galapagos Finches. The student has selected a comparison between seasons (first
panel), and has selected "individual differences" as the comparison type (second panel). The particular constructed query is
assembled at the bottom of the screen.

Strategic tools
Scaffolded tools can help represent more of the structure of the task for learners. We have designed the structure of The
Galapagos Finches software as a strategic tool (Reiser et al., 2001; Tabak & Reiser, 1997; Tabak et al., 1996). The
Galapagos Finches enables learners to investigate changes in populations of plants and animals in an ecosystem, and serves
as a  platform  for learning principles of  ecology   and  natural selection. The tool  makes   explicit  the key  strategies for
examining   ecosystem  data  --  scientists can study   a  population  through  time  (a longitudinal   comparison)   or split a
population according to some dimension of interest, such as comparing male to female or young to adult (a cross-sectional
comparison). These two families of comparisons are options students must select when constructing a query (shown as the
choices "seasons" and "subgroups"). Similarly, students must articulate what type of comparison they wish to perform
(looking at individual differences, relationship between two variables, and so on). In this way, students are led to articulate
the strategic intent of a data comparison, rather than phrasing their action in terms of the surface details (see Figure 1).
Similarly, in the ExplanationConstructor, disciplinary frameworks are represented in explanation guides that students use to
ensure that their explanations address the key features of the framework (see Figure 2).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   260

Figure 2.  The  ExplanationConstructor    used  to articulate questions, explanations,   and  backing   support. The   outline of
questions, subquestions, and explanations is shown in the upper left Organizer panel. Explanation guides are shown in the
upper right.
The following example from a group of high school students using the Galapagos Finches and ExplanationConstructor
demonstrates  how   the explanation    guides can  help  structure students' analysis  of  their findings. In this example,    the
students' attempt to satisfy the explanation guides provokes debate on one of the key ideas in the domain, the nature of
traits. In considering whether their finding fits the goal of identifying traits, the group disagrees about whether food choice
qualifies as a trait. In the course of this debate, the group brings in key ideas about physical traits and the relation between
structure and function. This is an example of the problematizing nature of the scaffold -- having to structure their analysis
of their  findings in terms    of the  theoretical framework    embedded     in  the tools forced   students  to structure their
understanding of the specifics of the case in terms of principles of the domain.
     Evan: (reading prompt) "Environment causes..."
     Janie: No!
     Evan: Yeah, "to be selected for..."
     Janie: Yeah, but that means like...
     Evan: // what food they eat //
     Janie: ... organism with these trait
     Evan: // the trait being the food
     Franny: Yeah, that's right.
     Janie: No, because like, if my trait is to eat steak, and there's no steak, I'm immediately gonna go to something
     else.
     Evan: If you're only a vegetarian and you only eat... you don't eat meat, you're not gonna eat meat. Well, that
     depends...//
     Janie: Are you insane!?
     Franny: OK, OK. Don't think of people. Think of these guys (the finches). If they only eat one type of seed with
     their beaks and that seed is gone then they can't live anymore.
This example demonstrates the type of discourse we aim to create through the scaffolds. The structure they impose on
students' work causes them to grapple with key disciplinary ideas such as the nature of a trait and the difference between a
species' characteristic traits and  learned   behaviors. Decisions   about   the use  of  the artifact became    the context   for
negotiation  between  the students  of  these important  disciplinary  ideas. Both   sense making   (interpreting  the observed
differences in individuals as candidates for traits supporting differential survival) and articulation were supported by the
problematizing nature of the strategic tool.

Strategic artifacts
Just as the tools students use are structured to help them understand the task, we also structure the key work products
students create to clearly represent important conceptual distinctions and task structure. Just as transparency in cognitive
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page      261

artifacts that people use can affect the ease with which they can achieve their desired ends in actions in the interface, here
we aim for transparency in the artifacts people create. Our goal is for students to create artifacts that clearly represent the
important strategic and disciplinary thinking they have performed in creating the artifact. Contrast this with more traditional
artifacts such as verbal essays, in which the research behind the essay and the deeper argument structure embedded in the
essay may be very difficult to discern.
In the Animal Landlord, students study examples of animal behavior to isolate and analyze the key components of complex
animal behavior (Smith & Reiser, 1998). Students study examples of behavior sequences such as hunting or eating and
deconstruct the complex sequence into what they see as the important causal events. For each event, students record their
observation of the event and their inference of the importance of that event (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. Strategic Artifacts from  the   Animal  Landlord. Students  decompose     complex   behavior into its constituents,
categorize each constituent, and record their observations and interpretations.
The artifacts students create are structured  to represent  key aspects of the   task. Students study  complex  behavior     by
decomposing a sequence into its constituents, represented by the rows of actions, and categorize each constituent, indicated
in the label attached to the frame. Their analyses are structured into Observations (what we can see in the data) and
Interpretations (what we infer from these observations) a key distinction in the scientific practice students are learning.
Again  this provides   both structure   and problematizing. The  structure prompts     students to perform  the  subtasks     of
observation an interpretation. In addition, forcing them to categorize their observations pushes students to articulate their
understanding and represent it in the artifact. The explicit distinction between observation and interpretation facilitates
discussions geared at understanding the relationship between the two.
The following episode illustrates how the structure of the artifacts forces students to grapple with disciplinary content
(Golan, Kyza, Reiser, & Edelson, 2001). This debate was recorded from a group of three 7th grade students who were
watching a clip featuring two Golden Lion Tamarin monkeys eating a grape. One of the monkeys (the female) had the
grape first and then the male took it away from her, jumped over her and moved to another branch. The students were
arguing about the part in which the male Tamarin jumped over the female. Two of the students believed that was an
instantiation of the "mount" behavior, while the third student did not agree. In essence this argument was about what
"mount" means, is it merely contact between two animals or more than that?

    S2: What did we observe as mount? (reading)
    S1: No, that one is yours because I totally disagree with you guys!
    S2: Good for you! Come on man, you see in the clip it just looks mounting, they got on top of each other.
    S1: No, he jumped over her.
    S3: She, she jumped over him...
    S1: Whatever, she jumped over him.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page  262

     S2: I know, but still, the contact...
     S1: She jumped over him, doesn't matter, contact is not what you guys are talking about. Shoot, you are talking
     about like getting on top of each other and staying on top for a couple of minutes.
     S3: No, no, no. We are not talking about that!
     S2: No, no, not that, no, no, that's not. See, look, watch this contact. Boom! Look at that!
     S1: Jumping over! Over!

This argument was finally settled by one of the researchers explaining to the students what the behavior "mount" means in
the domain of animal behavior. This discussion surfaced students' implicit definitions of the behavior, an important step in
learning to apply a categorization scheme. Again making these decisions as part of their analysis, and clearly representing
these distinctions in the artifacts they create provoked these and similar arguments, surfacing disagreements and eventually
refining students' definitions of these behaviors.
It is interesting that this disagreement had been brewing for some time in the group, but it had not been addressed. Had the
group merely been asked to report a summary of their observations, it is possible this discussion would not have occurred.
Forcing students to articulate their understanding and represent it explicitly using menu item labels and the Observation and
Interpretation structure finally surfaced the differences in interpretation and provoked these productive discussions.

CONCLUSIONS
I have argued that scaffolding may occur through two complementary mechanisms, structuring and problematizing. Most
accounts of  scaffolding  define  support   that helps   students   proceed  through   tasks. However,   given the    importance   of
connecting   students' problem  solving    work  to  disciplinary   content, skills, and strategies, it may also    be important   to
provoke  issues in  students,  veering them    off   the course   of non-reflective   work,   and forcing   them   to  confront key
disciplinary ideas  in their solutions to  problems.     The artifacts students  use   and create can   be  designed   to map   onto
important disciplinary ideas and strategies, thereby problematizing these ideas as students use the tool to work through the
task and represent the products of their work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper   builds upon  the  design  research   of the  BGuILE     group   at Northwestern    University, and   I am    grateful to
conversations  with  my  colleagues   Iris  Tabak,   Brian   Smith,  William    Sandoval,  Ravit  Golan,   and Elena   Kyza   about
principles of scaffolding in learning environments. I am also grateful to my colleagues in the KDI/ASSESS group for
discussion of these ideas, Joseph Krajcik, Danny Edelson, Elliot Soloway, Chris Quintana, and Betsy Davis, and to Bruce
Sherin for many fruitful discussions. This research was funded by the James S. McDonnell Foundation, Cognitive Studies
for Educational Practice, and by the National Science Foundation under grants #REC-9720383 to the Center for Learning
Technologies in Urban Schools and #REC-9980055 to the KDI/ASSESS project. The opinions expressed herein are those
of the author and not necessarily those of these foundations. For additional information about BGuILE software or curricula
see: http://www.letus.org/bguile/

REFERENCES
Bannon, L. J., & Bødker, S. (1987). Beyond the interface: Encountering artifacts in use. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Interfacing
         thought: Cognitive aspects of human-computer interaction (pp. 227-253). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bell, B., Bareiss, R., & Beckwith, R. (1994). Sickle Cell Counselor: A prototype goal-based scenario for instruction in a
         museum. The Journal of the Learning Sciences.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating project-based
         learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26, 369-398.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and
         novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Cognition and Technology Group.    (1990).   The    Jasper   series as an    example  of anchored    instruction: Theory,  program
         description, and assessment data. Educational Psychologist, 27, 291-315.
Collins, A., & Brown, J. S. (1988). The computer as a tool for learning through reflection. In H. Mandl & A. Lesgold
         (Eds.), Learning issues for intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 1-18). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing, and
         mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp.
         453-494). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page   263

Davis,  E.   A., &  Linn,  M. C.   (2000). Scaffolding   students' knowledge   integration: prompts for  reflection in KIE.
         International Journal of Science Education, 22, 819-837.
Edelson, D. C. (2001). Learning-for-use: A framework for integrating content and process learning in the design of inquiry
         activities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38, 355-385.
Edelson, D.   C.,  Gordin, D.  N., &  Pea,  R.   D.  (1999). Addressing   the challenges of  inquiry-based learning through
         technology and curriculum design. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 391-450.
Golan, R., Kyza, E. A., Reiser, B. J., & Edelson, D. C. (2001). Structuring the task of behavioral analysis with software
         scaffolds, Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Association of Research in Science Teaching. St.
         Louis, MO.
Guzdial, M. (1994). Software-realized scaffolding to facilitate programming for science learning. Interactive Learning
         Environments, 4, 1-44.
Hiebert, J., Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Fuson, K., Human, P., Murray, H., Olivier, A., & Wearne, D. (1996). Problem
         solving as a basis for reform in curriculum and instruction: The case of mathematics. Educational Researcher,
         25(4), 12-21.
Hollan,  J., Hutchins, E., &   Kirsh, D.   (2000).  Distributed cognition:  Toward a   new  foundation for human-computer
         interaction research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction., 7, 174­196.
Hollan, J. D., Bederson, B. B., & Helfman, J. (1997). Information visualization. In M. G. Helander & T. K. Landauer & V.
         Prabhu (Eds.), Handbook of human-computer interaction (pp. 33-48). Essex, UK: Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E., Hollan, J. D., & Norman, D. A. (1986). Direct manipulation interfaces. In D. A. Norman & S. Draper (Eds.),
         User centered system design: New perspectives in human-computer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jackson, S. L., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1998). The design of guided learning-adaptable scaffolding in interactive
         learning environments. In C.-M. Karat & A. Lund & J. Coutaz & J. Karat (Eds.), Proceedings of CHI 98: Human
         Factors in Computing Systems, (pp. 187-194). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1993). Reifying implicit planning in geometry: Guidelines for model-based intelligent
         tutoring system design. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Loh, B., Reiser, B. J., Radinsky, J., Edelson, D. C., Gomez, L. M., & Marshall, S. (2001). Developing reflective inquiry
         practices: A case study of software, the teacher, and students. In K. Crowley & C. D. Schunn & T. Okada (Eds.),
         Designing for science: Implications from everyday, classroom, and professional settings (pp. 279-323). Mahwah,
         NJ: Erlbaum.
Merrill, D. C., Reiser, B. J., Merrill, S. K., & Landes, S. (1995). Tutoring: Guided learning by doing. Cognition and
         Instruction, 315-372.
Norman,    D. A.  (1987).  Cognitive  artifacts. In J. M. Carroll  (Ed.), Interfacing thought: Cognitive aspects of  human-
         computer interaction (pp. 17-38). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Olson, S., & Loucks-Horsley, S. (Eds.). (2000). Inquiry and the national science education standards: A guide for teaching
         and learning. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Perkins, D. (1998). What is understanding? In M. S. Wiske (Ed.), Teaching for understanding: Linking research with
         practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Quintana, C. (2001). Symphony: A case study for exploring and describing methods and guidelines for learner-centered
         design. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.
Quintana, C., Eng, J., Carra, A., Wu, H.-K., & Soloway, E. (1999). Symphony: A case study in extending learner-centered
         design through process space analysis. In Proceedings of CHI 99 Conference on Human Factors in Computing
         Systems, (pp. 473-480).
Reiser, B. J., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. J. (2001). BGuILE: Strategic and
         conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.), Cognition
         and instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263-305). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York, NY: Oxford University
         Press.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaboration: Convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2,
         235-276.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page  264

Salomon, G., Perkins, D. N., & Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition: Extending human intelligence with intelligent
        technologies. Educational Researcher, 20(3), 2-9.
Sandoval, W. A. (1998). Inquire to explain: Structuring inquiry around explanation construction in a technology-supported
        biology curriculum. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Schank, R. C., Fano, A., Bell, B., & Jona, M. (1994). The design of Goal-Based Scenarios. The Journal of the Learning
        Sciences, 3, 305-345.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students' understanding of the objectives and
        procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, 131-166.
Schauble, L., Klopfer, L. E., & Raghavan, K. (1991). Students' transition from an engineering model to a science model of
        experimentation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 859-882.
Singer, J., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J., & Chambers,     J. C. (2000). Constructing extended  inquiry projects: Curriculum
        materials for science education reform. Educational Psychologist, 35, 165-178.
Smith, B. K., & Reiser, B. J. (1998). National Geographic unplugged: Designing interactive nature films for classrooms. In
        C.-M. Karat & A. Lund & J. Coutaz & J. Karat (Eds.), Proceedings of CHI 98, (pp. 424-431). New York: ACM
        Press.
Tabak, I., & Reiser, B. J. (1997). Complementary roles of software-based scaffolding and teacher-student interactions in
        inquiry learning. In R. Hall & N. Miyake & N. Enyedy (Eds.), Proceedings of Computer Support for Collaborative
        Learning '97, (pp. 289-298). Toronto, Canada.:
Tabak, I., Smith, B. K., Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (1996). Combining general and domain-specific strategic support
        for biological inquiry. In C. Frasson & G. Gauthier & A. Lesgold (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Third
        International Conference, ITS '96, (pp. 288-296). Montreal, Canada: Springer-Verlag.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of the higher psychological processes (A. Kozulin, Trans.).
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Williams, S. M. (1992). Putting case-based instruction into context: examples from legal and medical education. The
        Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 367-427.
