Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 265

H. (PEDAGOGY TRACK): TEACHERS AND CSCL

        Complexity, Harmony and Diversity of Learning in
        Collaborative E-learning Continuing Professional
                                      Development Groups
                                                   David McConnell
                                                 University of Sheffield
                                                  d.mcconnell@shef.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
In this paper I  examine the learning dynamics     of three collaborative, e-learning continuing  professional development
groups: specifically the degree of complexity, harmony and diversity in them. Two of the groups worked harmoniously, and
successfully produced a collective end product. The other group exhibited extreme anxiety and division, and required extra
resources from its members in order to sustain itself and produce its' collective end product. Anxiety became a major focus
for this group, which had the effect of diverting it from effective collective production. I use these differences as a point of
departure in order to consider the place of identity, control, ontological security and guilt in collaborative e-learning groups.
Keywords: e-learning, collaboration, groups, identity, control, ontological security, guilt, community.

INTRODUCTION
Collaborative e-learning in continuing professional development (CPD) higher education contexts is relatively un-common.
Distance learning has long been a source of education provision in CPD contexts, but the shift to a new generation of
distance learning involving course delivery entirely via the Web and Internet, and which involves collaborative group work
as the main pedagogical method, is slow to emerge.
In this paper, I draw on research into a two year, part-time professional development e-learning Masters in Education
course which is delivered entirely online and which has a pedagogic design focusing on collaborative and cooperative
group work. The focus of the course is on e-learning itself. Further information on the background to the design of the
course can be found in McConnell, 2001.
Participants are organised into small groups of between 7-10 members with a tutor. They work together for periods of
between 16 and 32 weeks using Web-CT asynchronous forums and synchronous chat rooms for their communications and
group work.
The collaborative issues and problems which the groups work on are characterised by the following:
·   Complex: The problems and issues researched by these groups are defined by the groups themselves through processes
    of negotiation. They are usually complex, often ill-defined problems which are fertile ground for the production of
    mutual understandings and the construction of "shared resolutions" (Schon, 1983).
·   Have a personal and professional focus: They are important to the members of the group, arising from concerns and
    interests they may have about their professional practice. The outcomes associated with the group work will be of
    benefit to the members in their professional practice.
·   Require negotiation and communication to understand them: because the issues researched are invariably complex and
    ill-defined, the members of each group have to engage in considerable communication in order to understand them and
    in  order to negotiate changes in  their perception    of the `problem'  and its  resolution as their work  progresses.
    Communication is both task oriented and socially centred. The groups function both as learning communities (Pedler,
    1981; Snell, 1989) which have an interest in sharing, supporting and learning collaboratively in a social context, and
    communities of practice (Wenger, 1998) in which members are actively constructing understandings of what it means
    to be professional e-learning practitioners.
·   Require an action research approach to progress them: The groups are encouraged to view their research and learning
    as "action research" (Carr & Kemmis, 1986; Elden & Chisholm, 1993; Whitehead, 1989; Winter, 1989), and they are
    introduced to the concept of action research in an earlier e-seminar. This provides them with a model of how to act
    together, which helps guide them in their work.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  266

·   Require a journey of learning: There are no specific pre-defined learning outcomes. Each group embarks on a learning
    journey which requires collaboration but which does not define in exact detail how they should work together or what
    the outcomes of their learning should be. In this respect, the groups are following a long tradition of adult-learning
    which supports openness and exploration (Boot & Hodgson, 1987; Cunningham, 1987; Harris, 1987), and which has a
    history in experiential learning groups (Reynolds, 1994; Davis & Denning, 2000).
·   Involve a high degree of reflexivity: Learning in these groups is highly experiential, and the groups are therefore
    encouraged to be reflective and to use this as a source of learning (Boud and Walker, 1998; Moon, 1999).
There are usually significant differences in the learning dynamics of these groups, and in the way they negotiate and carry
out their collaborative work, and in the way they produce their final product. It is some of these differences which I will
examine here.

METHODOLOGY
I examined the activities of three e-groups which were working at the same time, but separately. In carrying out their work,
members of each group produced approximately one thousand separate entries in their own asynchronous forums, which
when printed amounts to at least 200 pages of text per group. Each group also used the Web-CT synchronous chat facility
and as an example, members of one group participated in 15 synchronous chat sessions, each lasting at least one hour,
which amount to over 100 pages of text.
I analysed the transcripts of the textual communications of the groups using a grounded theory approach (Glaser & Strauss,
1968; Strauss  & Corbin, 1990). I started    by reading  the transcripts and making   annotations  in the  margins indicating
different features of the group's work such as shared ideas, disclosure, planning for chat sessions, summaries of chat
sessions, the production of documents,   discussions     of the documents,   joking, sharing   professional practice, sharing
resources, the production of timetables of planned work, reference to stakeholders and so on. As part of the procedure I also
made analytical notes to myself highlighting possible interesting issues for investigation and analysis.
As the entries of each member of the group is numbered in the transcripts (along with dates and times and other contextual
information), I was able to follow the various threads of the discussions with relative ease.
This first reading of the transcripts allowed me to `get a feel' for the group's work and to immerse myself in the data. By a
process of progressive focusing (Parlett, 1981) and constant comparison (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) issues of relevance and
potential importance concerning the nature of the groups' work became apparent. I then looked in depth at these emerging
issues, re-read the margin annotations and notes to myself, moving back and forward from the text of the transcripts to my
notes. I then made a new set of notes on the particular issue and proceeded to engage in a new round of analysis in order to
illuminate the issue in some detail (Parlett, 1981).
This qualitative research approach allows the emergence of sensitizing concepts, which are:
"...less specific suggestive ideas about what might be potentially fruitful to examine and consider, an emergent meaningful
vocabulary that alerts the researcher to promising avenues of investigation" (Clarke, 1997).
rather than the generation of definitive concepts from data abstracted from their social milieus. The purpose is to remain
close to the natural world being researched.

FINDINGS
In this section I present the findings relating to one group (group two), and in the following discussion section, I examine
the degree of complexity, harmony and diversity in the three e-learning groups.
Two of the groups (groups one and three) worked harmoniously, and successfully produced a collective end product, which
they were happy with. The other group (group two) exhibited extreme anxiety and division, and required extra resources
from its members in order to sustain itself and produce it's collective end product. Anxiety became a major inward looking
focus for this group, which had the effect of diverting it from effective collective production. It did produce a collaborative
product, but one which the group was not entirely happy with. The patterns of work and communication of the three groups
can be summarised as:

Group One: characterised by
Negotiation
Discussion
Agreement
Work and research
Collaboration
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page       267

Production

Group Two: characterised by
Struggle ­over leadership; over project focus and group processes
Argument
Changing minds and direction
Personality and identity
Anxiety
Learning conflict
Closed-ness: use faxes, chats, telephone, email as well as open forums. But this has not been agreed by members, but
brought about by division and struggle to be productive
High introspection which "becomes" a major component of their project

Group Three: characterised by
Negotiation
Support for each other
Openness
Discussion
Agreement
Work and research
Collaboration
Production

Patterns of group two
In analysing the work of group two, several patterns of communication and group dynamics can be discerned which
illustrate some of the problems they faced:
1.Members not replying to requests or questions from other members.
Throughout the life of the group it was evident that members often did not reply to requests and questions from other
members. Analysis of the group's work shows that this involved:
  Members posting summaries of decisions made by sub-groups in the asynchronous forums, and inviting (by name)
  those not present to comment on them, with not response from them.
A member taking time to reflect on the dynamics of the group and post her thoughts on why there were no replies, and
receiving no response.
A member trying to get the group to discuss how they are working together, with no response.
Members posting sets of possible guidelines which had been devised by sub-groups for improving communications within
the group as a whole ­ with no response from others
A member trying to summarise where they are in their group work, with no response (she was not asked to provide the
summary, but in other groups when this happened members were always grateful and acknowledged the entry).
A member inviting others to brainstorm ideas about group effectiveness, with no-one participating
A member    posting the  final plan for the group's collaborative work after discussion    in a group chat session: no     one
responds, and one person disagrees with its contents.
2. Anxiety
Members refer to themselves as being anxious, or to the group itself being in a state of anxiety over its work, including:
Perception that some members are deliberately contriving to produce division in order to examine its effects on the group.
Constant questioning and reflection about their own group processes
Their "struggle" (a term often used by some participants) to effectively collaborate.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  268

Exclusion experienced by some ­ others making every effort to be inclusive
3. Strong personalities
Some individuals taking very strong views on issues and not being willing to negotiate around them.
Disagreement amongst individual members, sometimes extreme
Differences in perceived level of previous experience and expertise, leading to perceptions that some members were better
equipped than others to fulfil certain tasks, or had greater experience and knowledge.
4. Decisions only being made by some members
In the early stages of the group's work, it proved impossible to find appropriate times when everyone could meet in the
synchronous chat sessions to discuss their work and make decisions. Sub-groups met in the chat rooms and later posted in
the asynchronous forum the outcomes of their discussions and any decisions made so that those not present could have their
say. This proved unworkable as those not present began to question the focus and outcomes of the chat sessions, which
often led to feelings of frustration by those who had attended. Decisions made had to be re-negotiated, which took time and
also caused members to feel that little progress was being made.
5. Changing ground rules and focus of project
In addition, the interpretation of decisions made in chat sessions were often questioned afterwards in the asynchronous
forums by some of those who had taken part in them. It seemed that the ground rules were being changed. This sometimes
led to ill feeling and a degree of mistrust. Agreement on the focus of the group project was a major example of this.
Considerable time and effort was put into negotiating the focus in several chat sessions, and on several occasions it seemed
that the group had successfully negotiated what they should work on, only for the interpretation of that decision to be
challenged afterwards in the asynchronous forum. The group never satisfactorily resolved this (and it emerged frequently
throughout their period together as a point of argument and disagreement). They finally agreed that each member of the
group should work on their own professional interests (according to how they individually interpreted that), and report back
to the group on progress and findings in two/three weeks time. This is when the sub-groups were formed. At the end of this
period the group opened a new thread to discuss their findings, and at this point they did begin to work collaboratively as a
whole group.
6. The role of the Tutor
The tutor's role in the group was for some a source of anxiety. Reference was made to how tutors in other groups were
participating by way of pointing out how their tutor "should" be working with them. However, there was division over the
group's view of the role of the tutor. Some members were critical and looked for "stronger" tutor guidance. Others took the
opportunity to publicly thank the tutor for his support, signalling that they thought he was doing a good job.
The lack of effective group functioning in the early stages of the group's work caused some members to seek "outside" (ie
tutor) intervention to tell them what to do. This had the effect of forcing the tutor to make some important decisions on
behalf of the group which were not therefore owned by the group. For example, at one point the tutor suggested that the
group should have a manager, chosen from its members to help steer the group through its work. At another point he
suggested that, because they had spent an inordinate amount of time negotiating their differences, they should "just get on
with it" and work  towards   producing   their  product. Both    these decisions were    perhaps understandable    given the
circumstances, yet they had the effect of unwittingly dividing the group even further. Someone did take on the role of group
manager, but was largely ignored by most members. The group members did "get on with it", but did so in their sub-
groups, perhaps using the tutor's directive as a way of avoiding facing up to the divisions in the group.
7. The role of "closed" chat sessions
Compared to the other two groups, this group used the synchronous chat facility extensively. Chat sessions were very
important in the life of this group, and a great deal of the work of the group was conducted in them compared with their use
of the asynchronous forums. As we have already seen, not everyone could attend the chat sessions. So on some days one
sub-group would meet in the morning and make certain decisions. Those who could not attend would often meet later in the
day and try to `catch up' on the work of the first group. This often had the effect of making those who attended the second
chat session feel that they were working "at the tail end", having to address and essentially agree to an agenda devised by
the other group. These sub-groups also used other "closed" forms of communication such as faxes, telephone calls and
emails.
By contrast, the other two groups carried out the vast majority of their communications in the open forums where everyone
could participate or follow what was happening.

COMPARISON OF THE GROUPS
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  269

In this section I draw-on the differences between what might be termed the traditionally "successful" groups and the
"anxious" group as a point of departure in order to consider issues of identity, control, ontological security and guilt in
collaborative e-learning groups.

Harmony, communication and conflict
Groups one and three have a high need to collaborate harmoniously. Their starting point is to make each group a really
"good"  collaborative group     which  works harmoniously,     and  they  put considerable  time and   effort into  ensuring this
happens. They deliberately address the need to support differences and mutual recognition. They actively involve everyone
in decision-making, group processes and production. They work in ways that are open and accessible to all members and
make reference to this being an important requirement for success. They talk of "really wanting the collaborative project to
work". They could perhaps be described as being "dutiful".
Group two supports difference but also uses it as a source of conflict. They bring "differences" to the forefront and use
them constantly in negotiations    and  discussions.   However,  as a  group  they cannot   seem   to reconcile  some  important
differences in a way that helps them work together and be productive. They therefore sub-divide to achieve their tasks.
They also bring a high degree of closure to their group processes by the sub-groups using faxes, telephone, email and so on
within the sub-group rather than conducting their work in the open forums, therefore making it impossible for others to
participate and know what is going on. They never talk of "really wanting their collaborative project to work" as the other
two groups do. They are perhaps less concerned with "duty" and less likely therefore to collaborate as a group and more
likely to diverge, confront and question. Their high introspection causes them to constantly refer inwardly to themselves in
a struggle to understand  why     they are  working    in the way  they  do.  Therefore, experiential  learning  is high and the
opportunity to investigate group dynamics is high. In a sense, this becomes the focus of this group's project. To some
degree this group "contrives" (as some members put it) to produce its final product.
All three groups at some point divide their work so that sub-groups can focus on accomplishing particular parts of the
overall product. Groups one and three formally and openly divide and come to an agreement about how the sub-tasks relate
to the final product. They support each other in their sub-group work, which is open and accessible to all members of the
group. Group two works in sub-groups by default ­ perhaps as a mechanism for avoiding conflict in the large group. They
cannot easily find a way of working as a community. It seems people therefore form liaisons in order to deal with the lack
of agreement over the focus of their project. Collaboration in the sub-groups is carried out in closed circles, with little
communication   between   sub-groups    or, at times,   within the  large group. There   is some   evidence   of the  sub-groups
deliberately keeping their work closed from others.
However, group two does see itself as a group ­ there is evidence of them comparing themselves to the other two groups
and using them and their work as a reference point for themselves.

Reflexivity within groups
Each group is highly reflective about its work and learning processes, but in group two reflection becomes something of an
obsession, and actually becomes a major focus for the group without them collectively agreeing to it being so. It could be
argued that in the absence of an agreed focus, this group "naturally" (because of its particular circumstances and dynamics)
chooses its focus to be itself.
Considerable time, thought and energy is devoted to this by:
·   the group  struggling to    understand  itself. It has resource to  communicating    about its own  dynamics    as a way  of
    explaining what is happening to itself, justifying its actions, controlling members actions, comparing itself to the other
    groups, accusing members about various aspects of their project work and generally ruminating on the sense of distrust
    within the group.
·   Sub-groups devoting time in their chat sessions to trying to understand the group as a whole
·   Individuals choosing to focus their research on finding out about group processes and dynamics
Contemporary psychological thinking about distrust in collaborative groups suggests that rumination and reflection is not
always valuable in producing clarity regarding difficult situations or with producing insights into how to cope with them:
"..it seems reasonable to hypothesize that rumination about others' motives and intentions in situations where concerns
about trust already loom large will increase individuals' distrust and suspicion of others' behavior. In particular, one might
argue that the more individuals ruminate about the intentions and motives underlying the behavior of other actors with
whom they are interdependent in a trust dilemma situation, the greater their tendency to make more sinister attributions
regarding their behavior." (Kramer, 1999 p172).
The balance between taking time to ruminate and reflect, and that of leaving aside their differences and "moving on" cannot
be an easy one to determine when a collaborative learning group is in the middle of a difficult dynamic. This group could
have chosen not to spend time ruminating and reflecting. They could just have got on with the "task" of producing a final
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 270

product. But by focusing on themselves and their struggle to collaborate I think they show a real and genuine concern for
each other. To ignore the issues they are facing would be tantamount to saying that they did not care. But there is evidence
throughout their discussions that, at the individual level, they do care. They are trying to look after themselves. This is
evidenced in part by them continuing to communicate and not give up. They even remark on this themselves, showing that
they have a high degree of self-awareness. They do share and discuss, they produce work, and they never talk of splitting
up or giving up.

Group identity and self-identity
In his analysis of the self and society, Giddens (1991) suggests that:
"Self-identity (...) is not something that is just given, as a result of the continuities of the individual's action-system, but
something that has to be routinely created and sustained in the reflexive activities of the individual" (Giddens, 1991, p52).
Drawing on the work of the psychoanalyst R.D.Laing, Giddens suggests that one way of analysing self-identity is to
consider those whose identity is fractured or disabled. From such a viewpoint, the ontologically insecure individual may
display one or more of the following characteristics. They
·   lack a consistent feeling of biographical continuity; they cannot sustain a continuous narrative about themselves.
·   are in a constant state of anxiety, which prevents them from carrying out practical actions
·   fail to develop trust in themselves and their identity, and often subject themselves to constant self-scrutiny
Can the concept of self-identity and the analytical framework provided above be applied at the group level? For example,
can a group be described as being "anxious"? The analysis of the work of the three groups shows that they are all highly
reflexive: they are aware of themselves as groups and address their histories, development and their future. The anxiety
amongst the members of group two may work towards producing a sense of the group that is fractured or disabled.
Participants subject their behaviour and thoughts to constant scrutiny, which at times becomes obsessive. This group is
obsessed about questioning itself in a way that none of the other groups are. The other groups do reflect on their processes
and procedures and use this as a source of learning. But at times group two is very single-minded about this, and it pervades
the life of the group. The group never seems to get over its anxiety about itself, and the members constantly discuss and
scrutinise themselves and their actions.
What does group two feel in danger of? Not achieving its objectives? Not "working" as a group? Not "fitting" into the
required model of an effective group (whatever that is)?
The group doesn't seem to know itself ­ a condition which Giddens (1991) suggests is necessary for ontological security. It
seems to be struggling to find some kind of collective identity: some kind of ongoing narrative (Giddens p54) of itself. In a
real sense it does not know who it is or where it is going. This seems to be a major source of anxiety. Members of the sub-
groups try to work out how they came to be where they are, and how they can bring about change and development so that
they can influence where the group collectively is going. But this is perhaps inevitably doomed to failure as long as it is the
work of the sub-groups and not the work of the group as a whole. Factions, no matter how well intentioned and how
insightful they are, cannot mend the fractured group. As long as some individual members are not involved in the project of
making the group "better", it is probably the case that the group will not function well as a collective. If some members of
the group are with-holding their engagement, then the other members of the group will either
·   carry on the group's work without those people, or
·   spend a lot of time and energy trying to understand why those people are engaging in the way they are, whilst at the
    same time not functioning as a group. They can function as sub-groups and get some of their work done, but the
    division will make it impossible for them to achieve a collective group product.
In the other groups there is a high sense of self-identity as a group. They seem to have a strong ongoing narrative, which
they keep active throughout the collaborative project. These groups are inclusive and mainly work in harmony. Sub-groups
evolve from collective work and discussion as a source of production which feeds into the main group task of producing the
final product. Divisions, differences of opinion and so on exist, but the groups want to achieve and be successful, so they
are handled with considerable understanding and willingness to be inclusive and supportive. The focus on the well being of
the members of the groups seems to ensure this, as well as each group's need to succeed. These two groups work at
establishing their identity, constantly creating and sustaining it through reflexive processes.

Control and ontological security
Implicit in the actions of groups one and three is a high degree of "routinised control" (Giddens, 1991 p56) which helps
protect the members of these two groups against themselves. Their high need to collaborate and be productive within the
agreed parameters of the course requirements may mean that each member monitors themself so as to prevent schism and
division within  the group. Competition   and disagreement   do exist,   but are supported in    subtle ways by    processes of
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page   271

negotiation, give and take and reciprocity. Members are willing to "give" so long as that is taken as a criterion for existence
in the group and for successful production.
Self-control can be a powerful mechanism in these two "successful" groups. The language used in these two groups is
perhaps an indicator of this: it is always positive and the group members tell themselves that they are working well. They
say they are collaborating and succeeding in their work. They sustain an ongoing narrative about collaboration and success,
which is largely absent in group two. They believe what they say, and it has the effect of sustaining that belief. They trust
each other in these circumstances. This helps produce a sense of ease within the group about who they are and how they are
working. The effort needed to sustain the group is therefore greatly reduced, and with it any anxiety about the group is
reduced. All of this helps the performance of the group.
On the other hand, the members of group two tell themselves they are not doing this and perhaps therefore reduce the
chances of it happening? They come to believe that they cannot collaborate successfully. They cannot seem to begin to
develop a positive ongoing narrative about themselves, let alone sustain it throughout their time together. This keeps the
level of anxiety high within the group, which in turn has the effect of requiring extra resources from the members in their
efforts to sustain the group. Their anxiety is a source of constant examination and questioning which diverts them from
effective collective production.
There may be a need to control in order to produce harmony and effectiveness. The patterns of the work of the groups may
indicate the ways in which control is established and maintained.
The conventionally "successful" groups discuss and support each other. Members do not go off and do their own thing.
They do however work as sub-groups, but only after they have been given `permission' to do so by the whole group. At
other times the enthusiasm to achieve and be productive and the interest inherent in their collective work makes it possible
for individuals to legitimately go off and work separately and not be punished or ignored for doing so. Group two does not
easily perform    and has not   developed   routines  conducive    to sustaining the  group  and  its work.      At   the end  of  the
collaborative work, this group is still trying to develop its routines. It is still negotiating with itself.
The way group two functions helps throw light on how the other two groups function, and vice versa. No one group is
"typical", "correct" or "normal". Groups one and three may achieve collaborative and collective products which they are
pleased with and which meet the requirements of the course. But group two learns in different ways: it learns about itself,
and it learns about the dynamics of group-learning in difficult circumstances. Members may not choose to view this as
learning or as being worthwhile, though several of them do in fact see the learning potential of this and say so. The
members    of this group  may   in fact experientially learn so    much  about   collaborative group  work       that they are better
equipped to participate and survive in future groups. Disharmony and division open up the group processes and make them
available  to the  members  for  scrutiny   in ways  that do not   occur  in more   harmonious   and  less     divided    groups. The
experience may be difficult and challenging, but the potential to learn from it (if taken) can be high.

Outsiders
The MEd functions as a large learning community, with activities, structures and mechanisms which involve all participants
outside of the particular groups. The concept of outsiders can function in at least two ways in this context:
1.  when participants become members of a group, each group exists on its own, outside the community. Each group can
    "visit" the other groups and see how they are working, and compare their own group to the other groups. It is therefore
    possible for a group to feel like an outsider in this context.
2.  individuals in each group can also feel like an outsider in their group, lacking the necessary personal and social
    relations to feel part of the group
We know that outsiders are able to "look- in" with insight through the experience of being at the edge (Goffman, 1971)
They   are part of something  larger,   yet set apart from  it. They   struggle  to exist in the group       and produce   something
worthwhile, but at the same time they are outside the group and view it as an outsider. This may also apply to groups, as
well as to individuals. So in this virtual learning environment, group two can simultaneously carry on with its work towards
producing a final product while also looking at itself in a search for some kind of identity. This e-learning medium allows
this group to continue with their work whilst also continuing to try and understand themselves.
Defensivess is another trait of this group and another aspect of being an outsider. Some individuals are highly defensive,
which is one way of protecting oneself against anxiety. Similarly, not contributing to the groups' work and not participating
in discussions, and ignoring others' entries and questions directed at you are other ways of keeping one's identity. By these
mechanisms, anxiety is kept to a minimum and to a level that can be dealt with. By choosing how often, and in what ways,
one contributes to the group's work, you are staying in control (and to some extent, controlling the work of other members
too) and therefore reducing the possibility of anxiety of one kind ie that which arises from confrontation and argument. This
is, however, likely to produce other kinds of anxieties, such as feelings of guilt about not participating and about the effects
of non-participation on others.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page   272

Guilt, trust and the community
Clearly the emotions of the members of these groups play an important part in shaping the work of the groups. Anxiety is
present in all the groups to some extent, but is pervasive in group two. The members of this group talk of their "struggle" to
collaborate, and at some time or other they all indicate a certain degree of guilt about the way they are interacting and
behaving. Their identity does not match up to the implicit and explicit contract of collaborative learning ie to work together
through processes of negotiation and participation. The existence of feelings of guilt pre-supposes people going against
norms sanctioned by the group or community (Giddens, 1991). The very presence of guilt therefore suggests the existence
of some kind of community.
At times trust is lost in group two between certain individuals. This has the effect of unsettling the group by raising
questions about trust generally. Although it is never actually mentioned openly, a reading of the communication transcripts
indicates an implicit lack of trust between one particularly strong-minded, and therefore significant, member and the others.
Trust is present in the sub-groups, but not across all individuals. Their language and actions are indices of this. In the other
two groups, trust does seem to exist across individuals. Members are loyal to each other. They do not abandon decisions
made collectively after the event. We have seen that in group two there is a pattern of decisions being made only to be
questioned afterwards, or abandoned altogether. To the members of this group, this feels like being betrayed. Groups one
and three work hard at developing a sense of trust, and at individuals winning the trust of others in the groups. They are
very open about themselves, their interests, worries and concerns. They actively support each other by making every effort
to "listen" and respond quickly. They offer to share the workload. They show commitment to the members of the group and
to ensuring that the group sustains itself and carries out its job of production. These are all characteristics of people with a
well developed senses of identity (Giddens, 1991). These groups could be characterised as being highly sociable.
In group two, being sociable is openly questioned by the significant member. She says she is not interested in socialising or
in getting to know the others. She is only concerned with getting on with the job of producing a collaborative product. This
admission has profound effects on the other members of the group, and as we have seen, acts to stop them being productive.
At the same time this person says she feels like an outsider, and talks of the group being made up of `cliques' and being
apart from her.
Although liking others, socialising and getting on with them is not always a necessary criterion for successful cooperation
(Axelrod, 1990), it does seem that in the context of an adult learning environment such as this, there is a real need for a
sense of trust and community. Trust is created by people taking time to listen to each other and to nurture an atmosphere of
caring (Giddens, 1991). This helps produce feelings of security within the members of the groups. In trustful situations
people are more likely to take risks with their learning, to push themselves and others beyond their present boundaries. This
can be highly developmental, as well as more likely to produce useful insights into the groups' learning processes.

END PIECE
In this paper, I have attempted to examine issues of self-identity and group-identity in the context of e-learning groups,
drawing-on concepts and frameworks derived from the examination of individuals in modern society. This has, I think,
been a worthwhile exercise, which has offered interesting and potentially useful insights into the ways in which e-groups
function.
Collaborative e-learning groups   exhibit complex dynamics and diverse learning processes and  outcomes. Pedagogical
designers who ask learners to work in such groups need to be aware of this. It is all too easy to design-in group work in the
assumption that the technology itself will "look after" the work of the group. This is unlikely to be the case (Mantovani,
1994).
One reviewer of a draft of this paper suggested I should conclude by suggesting ways in which to "better co-ordinate" the
"problematic" group to bring it on the "right path". I am grateful for this reviewer's comments: they made me think hard
about the issue. I am, however, reluctant to end the paper with a list of conclusions, or a set of procedures for the better co-
ordination of the "problematic"   group.  To do so would be to suggest that as  an observer I can easily translate      my
examination of the work of these groups into some general, pedagogical formula which will ensure that all such future
groups work harmoniously and on the "right path". I am not entirely sure what the "right path" is, or should be, in such
collaborative e-learning groups.
As I stated at the beginning of this paper, the collaborative issues and problems which these groups work-on are complex
and are not defined in advance, but defined by the groups themselves as they proceed. It seems to me that the particular
context of each group, the people involved, their different purposes and expectations and their personal and professional
backgrounds and concerns are all likely to be influential in how the groups work. To suggest that we might be able to
define in advance how each group should work, and provide a set of procedures that make that happen, is surely an
impossible task? It is in the nature of experiential group-work that there will be diversity in the dynamics of learning. Each
group exhibits a high degree of reflexivity and it is in these processes that perhaps their own individual understanding of
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 273

what it means for them, in their particular context, to be on the "right path" might emerge? More research is needed in order
to clarify if this is the case.
The role of the tutor in all of this is of course worthy of further examination too. As we have seen, tutor intervention has it's
own consequences and the outcomes of any intervention cannot be fully anticipated. Once again, to suggest that tutor
intervention will always put the group on the "right path" is to put too much hope in the skill, perception and facilitative
ability of tutors. Certainly, tutors can learn from their experience of facilitating e-groups, and they can learn from reading
about the ways in which such groups work. From this, the likelihood of them being more able to help groups in trouble will
no doubt be greater. But they can never be sure of the outcome of any particular intervention. The outcome of each
intervention is likely to depend on the context and circumstances in which the group is working at any one time. Once
again, more research is needed to understand this.
The issues discussed in this paper ­ the "reflexive organisation of self" as Giddens puts it ­ are characteristic of the period
we are living in. Reflexive self-control and moral imperatives appear to be guiding principles for the members of these
collaborative e-learning groups. However, as we have seen, their application has different affects in each group. Seen from
this viewpoint, this e-learning Masters course is highly moral in its explicit educational philosophy and in its learning
processes. It perhaps can be seen in this light: as an example of the need to be self-referent in a post-modern society.
Identity ­ of self and of groups ­ is something to be creatively worked-at in order to be sustained:
"The altered self has to be explored and constructed as part of a reflexive process of connecting personal and social
change". (Giddens, 1991, p 33).
In the context of these e-groups, it would seem that this applies equally to individuals within the groups, as well as to the
groups themselves.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank the three anonymous referees for their helpful comments on this paper.

REFERENCES
Axelrod, R. (1990). The evolution of cooperation. London, Penguin Books.
Boot, R. and V. Hodgson (1987). Open Learning : Meaning and Experience. Beyond Distance Teaching - Towards Open
         Learning,. V. Hodgson, Mann, S and Snell, R. Milton Keynes, SRHE/OU Press.
Boud, D., Walker, D. (1998). "Promoting Reflection in Professional Courses: the Challenge of Context." Studies in Higher
         Education 23(2): 191-206.
Carr and S. Kemmis (1986). Becoming critical : education, knowledge and action research. Brighton, Falmer Press.
Clarke, A. E. (1997). A social      worlds research adventure: The case of the reproductive    science.  Grounded  theory in
         practice. A. Strauss, Corbin, J. Thousand Oaks, Sage.
Cunningham, I. (1987). Openness and learning to learn. Beyond Distance Teaching, Towards Open Learning. V. Hodgson,
         S. Mann and R. Snell, SRHE/OU.
Davis, M. Denning., K. (2000). Online learning: frontiers in the creation of learning communities. In Proceedings of the
         Conference: Networked       Learning 2000  : Innovative Approaches to Lifelong Learning       and Higher  Education
         Through the Internet, University of Sheffield.
Elden, M. and R. F. Chisholm (1993). "Emerging varieties of action research." Human Relations 46(2): 121-142.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self-identity: self and society in the late modern age. Cambridge, Polity Press.
Glaser, B. and A. Strauss (1968). The discovery of grounded theory, Weidenfield & Nicholson.
Harris, D. (1987). Openness and Closure in Distance Education. Brighton, Falmer Press.
McConnell, D. (2000). Implementing Computer Supported Cooperative Learning. London, Kogan Page.
Mantovani, G. (1994). "Is computer-mediated communication intrinsically apt to enhance democracy in organisations ?"
         Human Relations 47(1): 45-62.
Moon, J. A. (1999). Reflection in Learning and Professional Development. London, Kogan Page.
Parlett, M. R. (1981). Illuminative Evaluation. Human Inquiry: A Sourcebook of New Paradigm Research. P. Reason,
         Rowan, J. Chichester, J Wiley & Sons.
Pedler, M. (1981). Developing       the learning community. Management   Self-development    : Concepts    and Practices. T.
         Boydell and M. Pedler, Gower, UK.
Reynolds, M. (1994). Groupwork in education and training: Ideas in practice. London, Kogan Page.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page  274

Schon, D. A. (1983). The Reflective Practitioner: how professionals think in action. New York, Basic Books.
Snell, R. (1989). "Learning to work in a peer learning community." Group Relations Training Association Bulletin.
Strauss, A., Corbin, J (1998). Basics of qualitative research: grounded theory procedures and techniques. London, Sage.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Whitehead, J. (1989). "How do we improve research-based professionalism in education ? A question that includes action
       research, educational theory and the politics of educational knowledge." British Educational Research Journal
       15(1).
Winter, R. (1989). Learning from experience: principles and practice in action-research. London, The Falmer Press.
