Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  275

    Reflective Communicator Roles in Preservice Teacher
                                   Team Email Discussions
                  Robert J. Beck, Richard S. Brown, Sue K. Marshall, Jennifer Schwarz
                           Department of Education, University of California, Irvine
                                                      rbeck@uci.edu

ABSTRACT
The objective was to model a type of effective team participant, reflective communicators, and their communications roles
during four, eight-person preservice teacher team email discussions of their classroom observations. An aggregate statistical
analysis revealed  significant correlations between  the quality   of reflective  observations  provided,  and  the   number and
quality of responsive messages received from other team members. Conversely, high responsive message senders were
associated with low quality messages. Reflective communicators were theorized to occupy a distinctive niche in the team,
both as a source of high quality reflective observations and who engaged in high frequency, bi-directional responsive
communications. Based on these criteria an individual analysis of the data revealed 13 reflective communicators among the
32  participants. Reflective   communicators   tended to   communicate      with   other  reflective communicators     in groups
containing multiple reflective communicators and increased these communications over time. Issues were raised concerning
the rights of teams to assure them access to reflective communicator leaders.

Keywords
Reflective communications, team composition, message directions

INTRODUCTION
Recently, great importance has been placed on the value of teamwork skills in increasing learning and performance in
education, military, and corporate settings (O'Neil, Chung & Brown, 1997). Morgan et al. (1986, p. 3) defined a team as "a
distinguishable set of two or more individuals who interact interdependently and adaptively to achieve specified, shared,
and valued objectives." Burke et al. (1993) concluded, however, that the demand for effective teams has outpaced the study
of teamwork skills. They identified several overlapping conceptualizations of teamwork competencies that were relevant to
the present study of preservice teacher teams, including: coordination (properly sequenced behavior and exchange of useful
information); leadership (providing and accepting feedback, and help); and, communications (transmission and reception of
support  behavior). Several    studies have reported  that patterns   of   giving  and   receiving  elaborated help   are critical
components of teamwork skills (Webb, 1993). Giving explanations helps senders of messages to reorganize and clarify
material (Bargh   & Schul,  1980);  receiving explanations  can    benefit  by filling in gaps  of   understanding  or correcting
misperceptions and strengthening connections between new information and previous learning (Mayer, 1984; Wittrock,
1990). However, both O'Neil, Chung and Brown (1997) and Brannick et al. (1993) have reported that the number of
explanatory messages sent was negatively correlated with outcome measures, i.e., the more team members communicated
the more their task performance suffered. Because of methodological choices, no study has yet been conducted on relations
between the number and quality of messages received and outcome measures.
Researchers have found that group electronic communications promote the sharing of multiple perspectives that lead to the
likelihood that one member will produce examples and interpretations hitherto unconsidered (Koschmann, et al., 1996;
Feltovitch, et al., 1996). Reed and Bolstad (1991) found that in a word problem task involving mastery of an equation,
students provided with both simple and complex examples outperformed all others, including those who had been presented
with one example plus step by step procedures for solving word problems, in general. Exposure to multiple examples of
concepts in particular performance tasks in collaborative learning may contribute to greater individual discrimination of the
underlying concept.
This study  was   concerned  with  team   communications   that   might  be  associated   with  individual  preservice  teachers'
conceptual  understanding  of  teaching  standards as observed     in field  classroom   activities through computer    mediated
teamwork. It was hypothesized that preservice teachers in computer mediated groups who exhibited particular teamwork
skills, such as the frequency and quality of messages communicated, and who had access to multiple examples produced by
the team,  would   also construct higher  quality observations.   Data concerning   these    communications    skills associations
would  also contribute  to the  analysis of the   characteristics and  roles of  a type   of effective team member,     reflective
communicators, and lead to criteria for the equitable composition of teams.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page   276

METHOD
Task and Procedure
Using the California Teaching Standards for the Profession as a framework, teachers were set the task of observing and
reporting on   activities in  their supervisors'  classrooms    that exemplified   five     different standards  in weekly   writing
assignments. The five standards used were:
1.2 Uses a variety of strategies and resources to meet the needs of all students.
2.7 Create opportunities for students to become self-directed learners.
3.4 Develops and uses a repertoire of instructional strategies well suited to teaching to a particular subject matter.
4.5 Chooses and adapts instructional materials to make subject matter relevant to students' understanding of subject matter.
5.4 Uses a variety of assessments to determine what students know and are able to do.
Email listserv discussion groups were used to communicate observations of these standards. In addition, the teachers were
asked to  follow  up  by   responding   to  particular participants  for whatever     reason  they    cared to. Whether   in making
observations or in responding to particular participants, all messages were addressed and copied to the whole group.

Sample
Thirty-two multiple subject teachers in a 5th year credential program were randomly assigned to four email groups of eight
participants each. Of this group, 29 were female.

Data Analysis
Scoring Rubrics
Rubrics were developed for coding the email transcripts. One rubric was used to score the classroom observations about
teaching standards. Three dimensions were scored (ascending scale): 1. Aptness, the extent to which students' observations
were relevant to the standards (0, 1, 2 or cannot score); 2. Detail and context, the extent to which there was sufficient detail
and context to explain what the teacher and/or students were doing in the classroom instruction (0, 1, 2 or cannot score); 3.
Reflection, or the  extent   to   which observations   incorporated: (3.1)  interpretations   about   teacher's  strategy or student
outcomes;   (3.2) interpretations   explaining why   a  strategy   was beneficial;    (3.3) questions;  (3.4)   connections  to other
observations; or, (3.5) alternatives considered (0-5 based on one point for each criterion, or cannot score).
A second rubric was applied to all responses to observations. These were scored for quality by two independent raters who
achieved 90% agreement. This scale used the same criteria as the Reflection dimension above (0-5 based on one point for
each of criteria, or cannot score).

Plan of Analysis
In Phase  1 of the  study,    the data  were statistically analyzed  by  correlating   measures  of    messages  sent  and  received,
reflective response quality and observation quality. Based on these findings, Phase 2 focused on an individual analysis that
modeled   the qualities   and roles of  effective communicators     and  their  distribution in  the  four  groups. In Phase    3, we
examined communications among effective communicators in the four groups and over time.

RESULTS
Phase   1:  A  Correlational      Model    of  Sending     and   Receiving      Message      Frequency      and   Quality    Across
Standards
A model was proposed concerning the interactions of sending and receiving messages, response quality and observation
quality. Following previous findings, it was hypothesized that a negative correlation would obtain between the number of
messages sent by individuals and their quality. In contrast, it was hypothesized that individuals who received a high number
of messages   would   attract high  quality  responses, either  because  the   latter would   find their  messages   interesting   and
accessible, or because they perceived them as needing help. Therefore, a positive correlation was expected between the
number of messages received and response quality received. If these high receivers did, in fact, construct interesting and
accessible messages, then we would expect them to have relatively high observation scores, i.e., a positive correlation
between   number   of messages    received   and  observation  scores. But,  if high   receivers had    a negative  correlation  with
observation scores, then this would give credence that they might need help and were perceived by others as needing help.
Finally, it was speculated that a reciprocity principle might be operative concerning the number of messages sent and
received and, therefore, that a positive correlation would be obtained between the two measures. We had no hypotheses
concerning other iterations of these variables, i.e., between the number of messages respondents sent or received and,
respectively, the quality they received or sent; or, between respondent quality sent and quality they received. The results are
displayed in  Figure  1.  The   results were  significant  for all predictions  made   concerning     relations between   number    of
                                                                 (+) .413 p<.05
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page 277

messages sent and received and response quality. While significances at .05 are modest, given the small sample sizes of this
study, and in most studies of teamwork, and the fact that all were in the expected direction, the findings were considered
respectable. There was a negative correlation of -.366 (p < .05) between the number of messages respondents sent and the
quality of those messages; and, a positive correlation of .484 (p < .05) between the number of messages respondents
received and the mean response quality of the messages they received. Therefore, those who receive more messages tend to
receive high quality messages and those who send many messages tend to be low quality message providers. Moreover, the
number of messages sent was correlated significantly with the number of messages received (.413 p < .05) suggesting that
some form of reciprocity principle was operative, but the direction of the effect is uncertain. It may have been the case that
the number of messages received may have prompted respondents to send back a proportional number; and/or, the number
of messages sent may have encouraged other participants to send back a proportional number. All other correlations were
non-significant as expected. In addition, we investigated whether the relationships among variables between individual
members within each group supported the hypotheses, or if there were non-hypothesized dependencies within any given
group. The only   significant correlations identified  within   each             group supported the  hypothesized  model. No   other
relationships among the variables within a respondent group were significant.

          Respon         (-) .366 p<.05                 Respon
            se                                              se
          Quality                                       Numbe
           Sent                                         r Sent

                        NS           NS
         NS

          Respon                                      Response                                                Reflectiv
            se                                        Number                                                  e
          Quality                                     Received                                                Observat
          Receive        (+) .484 p<.05                                             (+) .342 p<.055           ions (D3)

Figure 1. Correlational Model of Mean Number and Quality of Messages Sent and Received Across Standards.
"NS" denotes that correlation is not significant.

The correlations for number   of messages   received   and   observation            scores were  less conclusive. Whereas, a modest
significant positive correlation of .342 (p < .055) was obtained for the number of messages received and the observation
reflections score (dimension 3), correlations with dimensions 1 and 2 were non-significant. This suggests that the number
of messages received may be related to one's conceptual performance, but the effect is limited to teachers' competencies in
elaborating their observations reflectively and not in making apt or detailed observations. However, this finding tends to
support the conclusion that high messages receivers attract high quality messages because their observations are more
reflective, not because they are perceived as needing help.

Phase 2: High Reflective Communicators and Distribution in Groups
In this phase of the analysis, we took a closer look at those individuals who received a high number of messages. Because
of the significant correlation found between number of response messages received and reflective quality of observations
(dimension 3 score), and also between number of response messages received and number of response messages sent, we
characterized individuals who were high on all three of these variables as "high reflective communicators," and we looked
at the way in which those individuals were distributed across the four email groups. This allowed us to explore the nature of
their communication in a given group in our subsequent phase 3 analysis.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 278

A quantitative score for "reflective communication"  was computed      for each participant.  For   each of three    variables
(dimension 3 score, number of responses received, and number of responses sent), participants received a sub-score of 3, 2,
or 1, indicating their ranking in the top, middle, or bottom third respectively, among all participants. A sum of all three
ranking sub-scores was computed to create a single reflective communication score, with a range from three to nine.
The next step was to identify the high reflective communicators and look at their group membership. Thirteen out of the
thirty-two participants were identified as the "high" scorers; they received a reflective communication score between seven
and nine, indicating a combination of threes, or threes and twos on the three sub-rankings. High reflective communicators
were not evenly distributed among the four email groups, as illustrated in Table 1. While three of the groups had three or
four out of eight members identified as high reflective communicators, Group 3 had only two such members, and their
reflective communication scores were sevens. Thus even with random assignment to groups, the number of high reflective
communicators was not equitably distributed.

Table 1. Distribution of high reflective communicators across email groups
                 No. of High Scorers/                              No. of Lower Scorers/
Listserv Group   Their Reflective Communication Scores             Their Reflective Communication Scores
Group 1          3       Scores: 9, 8, 7                           5       Scores: 6, 5, 4, 4, 3

Group 2          4       Scores: 9, 8, 8, 8                        4       Scores: 6, 6, 5, 4

Group 3          2       Scores: 7, 7                              6       Scores: 6, 5, 5, 4, 4, 3

Group 4          4                           Scores: 8, 8, 8, 8    4                             Scores: 5, 4, 4, 3

Table 2. Summary of response messages among high reflective communicators
                     Percentage of response messages sent by high reflective communicators that are received by
                                                other high reflective communicators
                          Responses messages up to    Responses messages from       Reponses messages
Listserv Group            the mid point               mid to final point            overall
Group 1
(3 "high" members)        42.85%                      50.00%                        46.88%

Group 2
(4 "high" members")       52.94%                      71.42%                        63.16%

Group 3
(2 "high" members)        25.00%                      20.00%                        22.22%

Group 4
(4 "high" members)        70.0%                       82.61%                        78.79%

Phase 3: Communications Among High Reflective Communicators
In this final phase, we investigated the nature of the communication within email groups, and any differences between
groups, with a focus on the role of those identified as high reflective communicators. Within each group we looked at the
number of response messages that high reflective communicators received from each other. We also looked at this data at
two different points during the study to identify any patterns of change over time in the percentages of response messages
sent and received among high reflective communicators: a) after the second round of observations and response messages
had been sent (mid-time point); and b) after the fifth and final round of observations and response messages (final time
point).
Table 2 summarizes findings about the response messages among high reflective communicators. There was a high level of
responses sent and received among "high" members. Groups 2 and 4, each with four out of eight reflective communicator
members, had 63.16% and 78.79% of their response messages sent and received among high reflective communicators.
Group 3, which had only two reflective communicator members, had the lowest overall percentage (22.22%) of response
messages sent and received among "high" members. A second finding from this analysis was the increase in percentage of
response messages among high reflective communicators from the midpoint to the final round of responses, which was
evidenced for groups 1, 2, and 4. We speculate that the reciprocity principle may be at work for "high" members. The more
reflective communications high member send, the more they receive, and the effect may be compounded over time. Once
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  279

again, Group 3, with only two reflective communicator members did not display the same compounding effect over time
among its "high" members.

DISCUSSION
Identification of the reflective communicator type in teamwork communications has been supported by three kinds of
evidence: (1) In an aggregate statistical analysis, significant correlations were found between those who received many
messages, their observation reflection scores, and the quality of messages they received; (2) In an individual analysis, 13
reflective communicators      were   identified in  the four  groups.   Those  groups   with  the  highest number   of  reflective
communicators tended to communicate with each other more than they did with less reflective participants; (3) It was also
found that reflective communicators in groups with three or four increasingly selected each other to communicate with over
the course of the email discussions.
What  possible  roles   might  reflective  communicators     play  in teamwork?     While  it is  tempting to  identify reflective
communicators as leaders, or at least co-leaders, they were not so in the conventional sense, and this may be related to the
nature of the task in this study. As the findings show, reflective communicators attract communications from other team
members, including other reflective communicators. If reflective communicators lead then they do so by example. It is
theorized that their initial high quality reflective observations were inviting and accessible to others, particularly those who
were competent in reflective communications themselves. Reflective communicators speak in a relatively personal voice.
By  making   interpretations,  evaluative  comments     and  speaking  a language   of wondering    and  questioning they   reveal
something of themselves, their points of view and opinions. By making connections to other experiences and offering
alternatives to what was observed, they also reveal themselves as good analysts and comprehenders of the task. These are
particularly valuable skills that might serve the needs of the group as a whole in this observational task: communicators
who  provide  a strong   flow  of  worked   and  reasoned    examples   of high quality   observations and  responses   to others'
observations. A     follow-up qualitative  study  of the email   transcripts would    provide further evidence concerning     these
claims.
Even those who did not interact with reflective communicators were able to look on by reading the email texts created by
them  and  so may    have benefited    by reading   alone.  But, perhaps,  for this strategy  to be effective in  supporting  low
performers'  reflective  growth,  it might  require  longer  team  projects  than  in the present  case. While we   can  see  how
reflective communicators might serve the group, it is also apparent that a reflective communicator, by attracting many
reflective communications, thereby receives more feedback on her own observations and reflections. She also receives a
goodly flow of incoming high quality models of reflections, which could be subsequently adapted to personal use. And in
recognizing and communicating with other reflective communicators concepts are exchanged in a uniformly high quality
class. The richly competent, therefore, may benefit most, because their own communications have been multiply placed in
context by other high quality communicators. And the rich communicators increasingly find and interact with other rich
communicators. We are tempted to interpret this social grouping as adaptive for individual high reflective communicators,
for they would  obtain,   potentially,  a rich  set of evaluative and   contextual  perspectives  with which  to view   their own
observations and could use these perspectives to create more interpretative, evaluative, responses themselves.
But, surely there is also a downside to these conclusions. We found that Group 3, which had only two marginally high
reflective communicators, scored lowest in most of our performance indicators. It follows that it may be necessary to have a
minimal    critical mass  of  high   reflective  communicators    in  a  group. From    this  perspective, once   high  reflective
communicators are identified they could be equitably assigned to all groups. In the present context, three high reflective
communicators might have been required in an eight-person group. One might also adopt rules or guidelines encouraging
high reflective communicators      to  "communicate     with those you   might  not   ordinarily communicate   with  and   provide
support for such fellow team members." What is perplexing here is how to achieve such democratic ends, while at the same
time exploiting the value of the interchange among high communicators and their high quality reflective text for all team
members to read.

REFERENCES
Bargh, J. A., & Schul, Y. (1980). On the cognitive benefits of teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 593-604.
Brannick,  M. T.,    Roach, R. M.,    & Salas,  E.  (1993).  Understanding   team  performance:   A   multimethod study.   Human
         Performance, 6, 287-308.
Burke, C. S., Volpe, C., Cannon-Bowerts, J. A., & Salas, E. (1993). So what is teamwork anyway? Paper presented at the
         39th annual meeting of the Southeastern Psychological Association, Atlanta, Ga.
Feltovitch, P. J., Spiro, R. J., Coulson, R. L., & Feltovich, J. (1996). Collaboration within and among minds: Mastering
         complexity, individually and in groups. In T. Koschmann's (Ed) CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging
         paradigm (pp. 25-44). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                     page 280

Koschmann, T., Kelson, A. C., Feltovich, P. J., & Barrows, H. S. (1996). In T. Koschmann's (Ed) CSCL: Theory and
       practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 83-124). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mayer, R. E. (1984). Aids to prose comprehension. Educational Psychologist, 19, 30-42.
Morgan , B. B., Glickman, A. S., Woodward, E. A., Blaiwes, A.S. & Salas, E. (1986). Measurement of team behaviors in a
       Navy environment (Tech. Rep. No. 86-014), page 3. Orlando, FL.: Naval Training Systems Center.
O'Neil, Jr., H. F., Chung, G. WW. K., & Brown, R. S. (1997). Use of networked simulations as a context to measure team
       competencies. In  H. F. O'Neil, Jr. (Ed.), Workforce readiness: Competencies      and assessment (pp. 411-452).
       Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Reed, S. K. & and Bolstad, C. A. (1991). Use of examples and procedures in problem solving. Journal of Experimental
       Psychology: Learning, Memory , and Cognition, 17, 753-766.
Webb, N. (1993). Collaborative group versus individual assessment in mathematics: Processes and outcomes (CSE Tech.
       Rep. No. 352. Los Angeles: Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards and Student Testing (CRESST)).
Wittrock, M. C. (1990). Generative process of comprehension. Educational Psychologist, 24, 345-376.
