Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   281

    Applying Technology to Restructuring and Learning
                                Mary Burns, Marylu Menchaca, Vicki Dimock
                                           SEDL, University of Texas, SEDL
                             mburns@sedl.org, venus-v@mail.utexas.edu, vdimock@sedl.org

ABSTRACT
How can classroom teachers be assisted in developing constructivist learning environments supported by technology in
schools with large populations of traditionally underserved students? What role does available technology and professional
development   and  support   play   in allowing  or  promoting   changes   in   teaching  methods?   Results of   the  Southwest
Educational Development Lab project, Applying Technology to Restructuring and Learning (ATRL), indicate that teachers
changed their classrooms practices and professional development coupled with access to technology was instrumental in
that change. Teacher knowledge of how computer technology can be used to enhance learning and how to plan effective
learning activities were shown to be more important than strong personal computer skills.

Keywords
Constructivist Learning Environments, Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Professional Development.

INTRODUCTION
Classroom teachers are practitioners that need to be trained in developing constructivist learning environments supported
by technology.   Building   bridges between     research on learning  and  teaching  and   classroom  teachers  can   provide the
practitioner community and students with the benefits of the research efforts.
The Applying Technology to Restructuring and Learning (ATRL) project was aimed at developing an understanding of what
is required to help and support classroom teachers in the process of learning to implement constructivist strategies and use
new tools.   The study    examined  school   context   issues, teacher  qualities  and  the role  of professional  development.
Constructivism was defined as a learning theory that "proposes that knowledge or meaning is not fixed. . . but rather is
constructed by individuals through their experience. . . in a particular context" (Honebein, Duffy, & Fishman, 1991).
Constructivist learning environment (CLE) was defined as a classroom in which "instruction is more a matter of nurturing
the ongoing processes whereby learners ordinarily and naturally come to understand the world in which they live" (Knuth
&  Cunningham,     1991,  p. 164).  Technology   was   defined  as  computers,   whether  alone  or  in  combination   with other
hardware, software, or networks.
The purpose   of   the intervention    was to   assist and   support  participating  teachers  in  creating  technology-assisted
constructivist learning environments. ATRL project staff provided assistance in a variety of roles ­ technology consultant,
researcher, designer, developer, and professional development facilitator. Project staff worked in three areas vital to the
creation of these learning environments: planning, professional development, and follow-up assistance and support.
The research component of this project involved an intervention study with a two-tiered research design. Tier One was a
collective case study of the approximately 150 classrooms, located across six school sites, whose teachers participated in 72
hours of ATRL professional development. Tier Two consisted of six detailed case studies of individual teachers whose
experiences represented the process and the practices they employed in creating a constructivist learning environment
within their classrooms. Both quantitative and qualitative data were collected and analyzed.
An  analysis of  several  technology   training curricula for  classroom  teachers  revealed  that technology   skills training is
frequently the primary focus with little or no emphasis on managing technology use (Sun, Heath, Byrom, Phlegar, &
Dimock, 2000). However, ATRL teachers participated in professional development that modeled technology management
in the classroom, as well as instructional strategies that teachers could immediately apply in their classrooms.

Establishing a theoretical framework
"Constructivism is not a theory about teaching, but is a theory about knowledge and learning," (Brooks and Brooks, 1993,
p.vii) thus the ATRL project team developed a framework for understanding and exploring the implications of this theory
for teaching. Through a review of the literature (e.g. Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989; Duffy & Jonassen, 1992; Brooks &
Brooks, 1993;   Duffy     &  Cunningham,   1996;  Jonassen,    1996;  Maddux    et  al, 1997) the   team  arrived at   a common
understanding   of constructivist   learning theory    which   they  distilled into the  following   six working   principles   of
constructivism. These principles became the foundation for the ATRL project and were used for developing and carrying
out each of the professional development sessions.
    B.  Learners bring unique prior knowledge, experience, and beliefs to a learning situation.
    C.  Knowledge      is constructed  uniquely  and   individually, in multiple   ways,  through  a variety of authentic   tools,
        resources, experiences, and contexts.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   282

    D.  Learning is both an active and reflective process.
    E.  Learning is a developmental process of accommodation, assimilation, or rejection to construct new conceptual
        structures, meaningful representations, or new mental models.
    F.  Social   interaction  introduces multiple    perspectives through   reflection, collaboration,  negotiation, and  shared
        meaning.
    G.  Learning is internally controlled and mediated by the learner.
By developing and sharing these common ideas of how learning occurs, the ATRL team was able to create relevant and
engaging    learning experiences in  professional   development   sessions  that promoted     collaboration and  learner-centered
activities.
Because the project team's goal was to effectively model authentic learning environments in its professional development
sessions, they created activities that used limited numbers of computers rather than having a computer available for every
participant, since teachers reported that comfort in managing limited resources was more important than expertise in any
one application.

Models for managing technology in the classroom
Several models    for  managing  technology     in the classroom  were    also  used throughout  the   professional development
sessions. These models employed particular grouping strategies and were designed so that teachers could replicate them in
their classrooms. These models are described below.
The Active Learning Environments learning stations model was designed with a thematic focus of "Your Community." The
facilitator presented the activity and then functioned as a "consultant" for the remainder of the activity. With the goal of the
project explained, teams of four to five rotated through three different "learning stations" to gather data and information
about  their community.    One  station used a   digital camera   to gather images,    another station used  a simple electronic
spreadsheet to analyze data, and a third station used printed materials about the community. Each of the stations had roles
for each of the team members as well as instructions for completing the tasks at that station.
The Navigator Model was another group approach designed by the ATRL team. This model was more technology intensive
than the Active Learning Environments model, and it was designed so participants could learn to use a software application
while learning about some content. In this model, several teams of four were given a different part of a concept to explore
within their team. To do this, they were asked to create a "concept map" using concept-mapping software. While the team
carried out its initial discussion, one person from each team attended "Navigator" training. Teachers selected for that role,
spent approximately twenty minutes with the Navigators teaching them the basics of concept-mapping software. Once
trained, the Navigators returned to their teams, and instructed the rest of the team the software. The Navigator could only
give instruction and could not touch the keyboard. The rest of the team rotated using the keyboard so that everyone had a
chance to use the software.
The  Facilitator  or   Expert   Model   was  designed    to accommodate     different   skill  levels  of the  participants.  The
facilitator/expert was a person who had some experience with the software and showed novice users ("students") how to
use the software   application. The   facilitator/expert could not   touch  the mouse   or keyboard.   Each  group   had its own
facilitator/expert and the role did not rotate within the group. This model was useful for carrying out more complex projects
that required different skill sets and levels of expertise. When ATRL staff carried out this staff development session, it pre-
assigned teams and distributed the technology skilled teachers across all of the teams with the designation that they would
be the technology facilitator/expert for that team.
In The Collaborative Grouping Model all team members were responsible for creating a part of some final product. Other
models included individual work, working in pairs, and working in groups of three or more.
In all cases, participants discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the different management models and also the
appropriate uses of each model in their classrooms. Many opportunities were provided for teacher reflection about learning,
classroom    management   of  technology  resources,   and  instructional strategies throughout  the   professional development
sessions provided by the ATRL project.
Over  the   two  years of the project,  sixteen modules,   seven  videotapes,   and  multiple  print resources for  teachers were
developed    and incorporated  into a  professional  development   portfolio,   Active Learning  with  Technology.   Each of  the
sixteen staff development modules shared the following characteristics: They took into account teachers' understanding and
beliefs about how students learn; They were supported by constructivist learning theory, both in terms of instructional
approaches and the type of activity in which the learner engages; Utilized inquiry, problem-based teaching and learning;
Used commonly available software found in classroom settings; Included two or more instructional strategies for managing
a constructivist learning environment supported by limited amounts of technology; and they provided opportunities for
teacher reflection on how different instructional strategies could be applied to their classrooms.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  283

Follow-up assistance and support
Two major categories of follow-up assistance were also provided to participant teachers and school administrators. First,
over the course of two years, project staff made regular follow-up visits to each participating site school in addition to the
visits for professional    development     sessions.  During  these  additional  visits, staff observed   participating teachers'
classrooms, consulted with teachers individually and in small groups, and provided feedback, resources, technical support,
and information based on teachers' concerns and needs. The ATRL staff also provided ongoing interactive assistance via
the project's web site, a list server, e-mail interaction, and telephone conversations. Second, the ATRL staff developed a
variety of materials designed to aid teachers in creating constructivist learning environments supported by technology.
Sites
Selected school sites included a school in Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, New Mexico and two Texas sites (SEDL's
region) from each state in SEDL's region, with an additional site in Texas. The six site schools represented a variety of
demographic and contextual characteristics in order to create a variable sample for the research study. Because of the
selection criteria used for selecting the six site schools to participate in this research study, it is important to reiterate that
this is a purposive sample, rather than a random sampling. This approach is consistent with the qualitative inquiry process
(Borg & Gall, 1989).

DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Different  data  sources for   analysis, both   qualitative and quantitative, contributed  to  answering  the  research question.
Quantitative data sources included: a project-developed observation protocol, and the Teaching, Learning & Computing
Teacher   survey    (Becker   &  Anderson,   1998).   Qualitative data   sources included   field notes,  informal  observations,
unstructured interviews, case study interviews, lesson plans, staff development evaluations, and videotaped interviews and
classroom episodes.
How can teachers be assisted in developing constructivist learning environments supported by technology? To inform
answers   to this   research  question,  analyses of  observation   data included   comparisons   across  the  categories on   the
observation   protocol  to    document   which  practices   modeled  during   professional  development   were    transferred into
classroom practice. Comparisons of these categories, and of observation data, and of the computer skills self-assessment
with field notes were also conducted.
The    baseline computer   skills  checklist was  compared     with subsequent   administrations   of the checklist  to look   for
relationships between teachers' technology skills and constructivist approaches. The computer skills checklist was also
examined to gauge whether professional development session offerings to identify computer skills increase as a result of
professional development sessions.
Analysis of videotaped teacher interviews and the in-depth case study interviews helped reveal the personal process of
change that individual teachers must deal with when participating in an innovation. Interviews allowed teachers to discuss
their fears and frustrations as well as successes and milestones in transforming their practice into constructivist classrooms
supported by technology. Collaboration among teachers within instructional groups or among ATRL participants seemed to
encourage teachers interested in creating CLEs. Simply talking about ideas with others helped teachers as one teacher
explained, "I feel better now as I talk to other teachers, asking questions and sharing experiences. It makes me feel more
open-minded, and willing to try new things."
The Teaching, Learning, and Computing Teacher survey asked teachers what they believed about teaching and learning and
what support they needed to help them become the teachers they wanted to be. These data were compared to observation
data to augment each teacher profile. As the participating teachers had received professional development designed to assist
them in creating CLEs, it was hypothesized that rankings on constructivist practice and use of technology on the Teaching,
Learning, and Computing Teacher Survey would be higher for participating teachers than in the national sample. The
statistical method for this comparison was an Eta correlation ratio that measured the strength of relationships between the
ATRL teachers and the national sample.
Part Two   of   the classroom    observation protocol  contained  descriptors of  observable   characteristics of a constructivist
learning environment supported by technology, regardless of content area or grade level. The descriptors in this protocol
were formulated around the six principles of constructivism (mentioned previously). The descriptors for each of these six
principles were coded on a scale from one to five by SEDL staff for each classroom observation. Each descriptor was then
analyzed to determine the level of constructivist practice for each project teacher. Changes in mean scores from baseline to
year one and year two were noted and regarded as an indication of change in practice. The five levels of constructivist
practice observed for each descriptor were: (1) Not evident, (2) Minimal, (3) Sometimes, (4) Frequent, (5) Regular practice.
Results from the observation protocol were entered into an SPSS database and analyzed. Types of analyses included:
     H.  Cluster    analysis, in order  to sort cases by    common  characteristics into  groups  or clusters. This classification
         scheme allowed tracking of movement among teachers in terms of constructivist approaches.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                               page               284

   I.   Means tests, in order to determine teachers' "scores" in each of the descriptors in the observation protocol. These
        means were used to determine low, medium-low, medium-high, and high constructivist practices for each project
        teacher. Change in mean scores from baseline to the end of year one and year two were noted and regarded as an
        indication of change in practice if they achieved a significance level of .05 percent.
   J.   Cross tabulations of teachers' use of technology and level of use of constructivist approaches as recorded on the
        observation protocol during formal classroom observations.

Classroom Clusters
There was no one            model or prototype  of a constructivist                learning          environment.         Rather,    analysis of quantitative             and
qualitative data reveals that classrooms fell along various points on the continuum of constructivist practices. For the
purposes of classification, classrooms were placed in clusters along a continuum of constructivist approaches: low, low-
medium, high-medium and high. The classifications are comparative, not absolute, and indicate that these classrooms are
low, medium, or high in relationship to one another. The purpose of placing classrooms in clusters was to categorize
classrooms according to a set of common characteristics and to track the movement of these clusters over two years: Where
did classrooms start out and where did they move? Did classrooms remain in their particular category over time and if so,
why? Each category will be discussed below in greater detail.
As can be seen from Figure I those clusters that had the lowest baseline constructivist "scores" showed the greatest change
in classroom practice; Those with the highest baseline constructivist "scores" showed the least change.
                                                 Figure 1: Changes in Cluster Mean Scores

                      4

                     3.5

                      3

                     2.5

                      2

                     1.5

                      1

                     0.5

                      0
                       1998                                                                  1999                                                                 2000
                                                                                             Year

                                                                      Low          Medium-Low          Medium-High         High

Low constructivism
Fifteen percent of classrooms observed at the end of year two of the ATRL project were identified as "low constructivism."
This type of classroom fell on the lowest end of the constructivist spectrum with few or no constructivist practices. Low
constructivist environments were teacher-centered: the teacher did most of the talking and the major class dynamic was
whole group instruction.         Typically, the teacher stood                 or sat in           front of the      class with     students seated in rows.              Such
classrooms were characterized by a high degree of centralization and conformity. All students worked on the same activity
at the same time. The teachers in this category worked with the whole class as a group, or rotated around the room to assist
individual students.
Discourse was quite limited, consisting mainly of students responding to teacher-directed questions, usually providing short
or rote answers. Student contributions or attempts to contribute were often not acknowledged and students were offered
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page    285

little opportunity to express their viewpoints or share their knowledge about a particular domain. There was usually little or
no teacher-supported interaction between students. Though there may have been some use of small groups, there was often
little student autonomy and students worked individually on teacher-assigned tasks.
Technology use: In terms of materials, traditional resources such as the overhead projector, textbooks, worksheets, paper
and pencil, and   the chalkboard   were used.    Though    these classrooms   may  have   had  classroom   computers,   students
infrequently or never used technology. When used, these classrooms tended to employ tools that mirrored traditional
practices, such as students taking Accelerated Reader tests individually or the use of computers for teacher productivity.

Medium-low constructivism
By the end of year two, 24 percent of the formally observed classrooms were identified as medium-low constructivism.
Medium-low   constructivism    classrooms    differed from  low  constructivism  classrooms primarily   by    the way they  were
organized for learning and by their use of technology--though the most obvious distinction between the two may be one of
form as opposed to substance. Within these medium-low classrooms, students typically tended to sit together in groups
working on a particular activity. Quite often these groupings were in the form of learning centers in which students were
engaged in a number of discrete activities that were formerly conducted as a whole group activity. The worksheet was still
prevalent in the low-medium constructivist classroom. Of the activities occurring at each station, approximately half may
have been "open ended," that is requiring greater student creativity, problem solving, or greater student autonomy. Though
students may have exchanged ideas on assignments, and were allowed to experiment and explore new ideas, students
tended to be working together more individually than collaboratively.
The degree of collaboration varied across classrooms within this category. In some classrooms, students were arranged in
loosely cohered groups, interacting with materials and to a much lesser extent, with one another, in solving problems. In
others, the entire class was involved in the same activity at the same time. Though working in collaborative settings,
students communicated very little or not at all, and the main communication pattern was still teacher to student(s).
Technology  use:  There  was   no  pattern   of technology  use  in  a low-medium     constructivist learning  environment.   For
example, students in a low-medium constructivist classroom may have been engaged in an open-ended activity such as the
creation of a product of their choosing, or in a more close-ended assignment, for example an Accelerated Reader test or
word processing a report. Oftentimes, however, the computer activity was the most open ended, eliciting student creativity,
problem solving or critical thinking skills.
While the teacher demonstrated activities, students engaged in some hands-on activities and more skilled students assisted
less skilled students. The teacher solicited students' knowledge about a particular topic and generally offered more in-depth
questioning of students' prior  knowledge,      understanding  and  opinion. However,   patterns of   communication    were   still
predominantly teacher-student, versus student-student.

Medium-high constructivism
Approximately 32 percent of classrooms formally observed were identified as medium-high constructivism. Medium-high
constructivist classrooms differed from medium-low classrooms in terms of substance rather than style. They were more
learner-centered with the teacher in the role of facilitator or working with small groups of students. In such classrooms the
teacher  employed  a  variety  of instructional   methods,  including  class discussion,  student    writing, and  responding  to
questions.
Students also worked in collaborative groups or pairs and typically interacted with a variety of materials: books, reports,
worksheets, individualized instruction from the teacher, and the World Wide Web, to gain information. In some classrooms
students were  responsible for  their own    work,    as opposed  to a  collaborative product. Some    of the   classrooms  were
characterized by teacher-led activities, but in such cases the teacher asked open-ended questions and solicited students'
prior understanding. While the primary pattern of communication in medium-low constructivist classrooms was either
teacher-student or a weak student-student pattern of communication, in medium-high constructivist learning environments
the communication pattern was student-student and student-teacher.
While medium-high constructivist classrooms, like their medium-low counterparts, often employed learning stations, the
activities in each tended to be more thematic and open-ended and the activities distributed. In other words, while students,
at their various centers, may have been working on the same thematic unit, the activities at each station varied and students
were not all doing the same thing at the same time. While students might not be organized into centers, they were in fact
working either individually or collaboratively on multiple activities.
Technology   use: A   number    of technology     management     models    were evident  in this     medium-high    constructivist
environment.  First,  learning centers were     employed    in which   students were  provided   with  greater    opportunity for
communication,   peer  tutoring and   collaboration,   though  the  degree and  kind  of collaboration  tended    to vary across
classrooms. None of the centers observed was thematically integrated, and some were based upon traditional content such
as cursive handwriting and alphabetizing spelling words. In all of the centers the students interacted with each other by
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 286

talking and discussing the task at hand, although in most of the centers students were responsible for their own written
assignment or product for assessment.
A second model involved "concurrent groupings" where part of the class worked on a task at the computer while the rest of
the class focused on another activity. Sometimes the activities were related to each other, for example in two classrooms,
four pairs of students gathered information from the Internet to complete an assignment about a particular author. At the
same time the remainder of the students who were not on the Internet wrote a personal response to the author about the
story they listened to. In a third classroom, the majority of the class worked on a reading assignment for a class novel and a
creative writing assignment, while two students worked with a student teacher on a Hyper Studio stack.
A third model involved all students having access to all computers. This model occurred in very specific settings--a library
and computer lab--where access to multiple technologies was more prevalent than in the classroom. In the computer lab
most students had their own computer, and in the library, groups of three to five students created a group presentation.
Some of these students were practicing the oral part of their presentation, while other small groups worked at the computer.
In all of the three models described above, as students were engaged in activities, the teacher either worked with another
small group of students, or rotated among students, and offered assistance as needed. Though medium-high classrooms
exhibited certain models of technology management there was no discernible pattern of technology use. Since activities in
general tended to be more open ended, technology use also conformed to this pattern. Unlike the medium-low constructivist
classroom, where the computer station activity may have been the most open ended and creative of the stations, there was
no indication that this was so in a medium-high constructivist environment.

High constructivism
Twenty-nine percent of all classrooms formally observed were identified as high constructivism. The high constructivist
learning environments differed from the medium-high constructivist learning environments in terms of the frequency and
depth of student-centered approaches. These classrooms were characterized by students working together, autonomously,
cooperatively and collaboratively, at their own pace and on a real world topic of their own choosing, with different groups
conducting different activities simultaneously. Students appeared highly engaged and motivated by the curriculum and were
allowed to come up with their own expressions of a problem they had solved or a product they had created.
In such high constructivist classrooms, the teacher was truly a facilitator or guide, typically circulating among students and
observing student work. Most noticeable was that teacher talk, in relation to that of the students, was minimal. In most high
constructivism classrooms, the teacher rarely talked to the class as a whole and answered questions or offered guidance
only when it became obvious that students had exhausted all other forms of assistance. Further, within a high constructivist
learning environment, the teacher appeared to be a co-learner with students, spending less time conveying information, and
more time guiding students to sources of information. Field notes and formal observations noted that teachers in high
constructivist classrooms often learned from and with students. Most often the learning took the form of some sort of new
technology use but also included new concepts or facts within the subject area being studied. The research of Roehrig-
Knapp & Glenn (1996) supports this "co-learning" role of the teacher in a constructivist learning environment.
Technology use: Students used several computer applications--on-line encyclopedias, the World Wide Web, presentation
software, content-specific CDs, graphics software and word processing--for the purposes of research and expression. In all
instances of high constructivist learning environments observed, students were independently using computers to solve
problems, create intellectual products, produce written work, and other classroom activities. These classrooms had an
atmosphere of inquiry and communication that encouraged student contribution and direction. Students in such a high CLE
appeared to be highly engaged in the learning process and enjoyed a good relationship with their teachers. In such an
environment the teacher was the model of a guide, facilitator, coach and mediator.
Typically, project teachers indicated that the constructivist approaches modeled in professional development sessions, were
meaningful to their experiences. Teachers then seemed to utilize such approaches with or without technology with students.
Further, as teachers became more comfortable with technology, they were more likely to let students use it. Once teachers
allowed students to use technology and saw that many students had a certain amount of expertise, they were more likely to
cede control of technology to students. Once this control was loosened and teachers saw that students worked well with
technology and that their work improved as a result, they began to cede control in other areas, granting students' greater
autonomy in their work.

Professional Development, Student Culture, and Constructivist Approaches
Findings indicate that many factors appeared to have influenced teachers as they changed their practice to accommodate
constructivist practices supported by technology. Professional development opportunities appeared to have made a major
impact on teachers' practice. Professional development that allowed teachers to construct professional knowledge about
pedagogy, content, and technology, as well as strategies for managing the changing classroom environments seems to have
brought about the creation of constructivist learning environments supported by technology. Peer support was instrumental
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page  287

for teachers   as  they changed   their practice   and  also  seemed     to play an  important   part   in the process   of  creating
constructivist learning environments. This support came from colleagues or others such as an expert or leader.
As knowledge is a product of the activity, context, and culture in which it is situated, it is important for teachers to
understand   their community     of practice.    There was   not much    evidence    that teachers drew     upon  students'  diverse
background in their classes. Further, teachers appeared not to harness the benefits of the culture, knowledge and language
that minority families have to offer. According to Trueba (1999), teachers need to provide culturally different children with
an  environment    that capitalizes on  students'   existing linguistic  and  cultural knowledge.    If teachers  acknowledge     the
richness of  students'   first language  and  the  value  of their  life experiences   and  culture,  the  stage is set  for student
empowerment. It is crucial to create " ... a positive learning environment in which children become engineers of their own
intellectual destiny and co-construct their future" (Trueba, 1999, pp 147).
The majority of the ATRL teachers seemed to know little about their students' background as reflected in their answers to a
Funds of Knowledge (Moll, et al., 1992) questionnaire developed by the ATRL project. Ninety-one percent of the teachers
who completed this questionnaire did not know if their students spoke languages other than English at home. In addition,
58% of the teachers did not share the ethnicity or the socioeconomic status of their students. In informal interviews, some
teachers claimed that their students' background hampers their behavior and their willingness and ability to learn. It is
possible that teachers did not ask students about their prior knowledge because they thought students knew little or nothing
about the subject at hand.
For a student to open up and share what he/she knows, the student must trust the teacher and feel safe. It may be that this
atmosphere   was   lacking  in   some   classes  and that  when   teachers   did question   students   about   cultural experiences,
knowledge    of a  topic,  etc., students   were  less inclined  to   respond.   When   students  and   teachers  shared    the  same
ethnicity/race more constructivist approaches, such as the use of prior knowledge were evident, even though such use
appeared minimal and involved very visible or superficial aspects of culture, such as foods, celebrations, or heroes. Higher
level approaches where students are permitted to view concepts and issues through the prism of their own culture were not
reported. Although 54% of project teachers, had been exposed to diversity training, more research and training is needed in
how to help teachers achieve classrooms where students feel safe and valued and where supportive relations with teachers
and peers give children the opportunity to fully develop their talents and capacity.

RECOMMENDATIONS, CONCLUSIONS AND POINT OF VIEW
The study found four clusters of constructivist learning environments based upon variations in the intensity and frequency
of  constructivist approaches.    The   clusters were  Low,   Medium     Low,    Medium    High  and    High.  Within   the  clusters,
classrooms shared many common characteristics. Teachers' change in practice was significant across the two years of the
study.
We can assist teachers by providing them with collaborative groups where they can build peer support networks, and where
they can share knowledge and gain assistance in the process of implementing new ways of teaching within their schools.
Administrative support is critical to initiate and maintain change.
We need to know how to help teachers develop safe and empowering classroom environments for minority students and
present models to them on how to use and be sensitive to students' funds of knowledge and cultural capital.
While the presence of technology may make teachers cognizant of the need to change instructional practice, it did not result
in changing practice per se. Not only must we make technology available, we must increase teachers' understanding of how
to employ technology in meaningful ways. For the teachers in this study, change appeared to occur with teachers' increased
confidence/comfort    using    technology, supported   by a  collaborative   group of  other  teachers  in the school.  As   teachers
participated in   the ATRL     professional development     sessions, they   learned to   use technology,   but, more   importantly,
became conscious of themselves as learners and more cognizant of best instructional practices. The teacher became less a
repository  of  knowledge   and   more  a   general  manager  of   learning  in  the classroom.  The    student  role,  in turn, was
transformed from spectator to the protagonist in the learning process.
In the beginning stages of the adoption process of new constructivist teaching and learning strategies, it is important to
count on close peer support and expert help in the development of lesson plans. In addition, the availability of opportunities
for teachers to build confidence and comfort with the use of technology in a safe environment makes a difference in
achieving the actual integration of technology tools in a constructivist learning environment in the classroom.

REFERENCES
Adams,   S.  &    Burns,  M.    (1998). Connecting     Student   Learning    and   Technology.   Austin:    Southwest   Educational
         Development Laboratory.
Banks, J. A. (1993). Multicultural Education: Historical Development, Dimensions, and Practice. In Review of Research in
         Education (19), 3-29. Washington DC: American Educational Research Association.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 288

Becker, H. J. & Anderson, R. E. (1998). Teaching, Learning, and Computing: 1998. A national survey of schools and
         teachers describing their best practices, teaching philosophies, and uses of technology.
Becker, H. J., & Ravitz, J. (1999). The Influence of Computer and Internet Use on Teachers' Pedagogical Practices and
         Perceptions. In Journal of Research on Computing in Education, (31)4. Irvine: University of California.
Betsinger, A.,  Garcia, S. &   Guerra, P.  (2000). Research  Report for the  Organizing for   Diversity   Project,  2. Austin:
         Southwest Educational Development Laboratory.
Boethel, M. & Dimock, V. and Hatch, L. (1999). Putting Technology into the Classroom: A Guide for Rural Decision
         Makers. Austin: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory.
Boethel,  M.  &  Dimock,   V.  (1999). Constructing  Knowledge   with Technology:    A Review      of the Literature.  Austin:
         Southwest Educational Development Laboratory.
Borg, W. R., & Gall, M.D. (1989). Educational research (5th ed.). White Plains, NY: Longmans.
Brooks, J. G., & Brooks, M. G. (1993). In search of understanding: The case for constructivist classrooms. Washington,
         DC: Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & DeGuid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher, 18.
Cognition and Technology Group (1992).
Dimock V. & Rood, M. (1996). The Emergence of an Online Community: The Use of Computer Mediated Communication
         to Support Implementation of Problem-Based Learning. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
         Educational Research Association, New York.
Duffy, T. M., & Cunningham, D. J. (1996). Constructivism: Implications for the design and delivery instruction. In D. H.
         Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook for Research for Educational Communications and Technology (pp.170-198). New
         York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
Duffy, T. M., & Jonassen, D. H. (1992). Constructivism: New implications for instructional technology. In T. M. Duffy &
         D. H. Jonassen (Eds.), Constructivism and the technology of instruction: A conversation (pp. 1­16). Hillsdale, NJ:
         Lawrence Erlbaum.
Greenfeld, P. M., Raeff, C., & Quiroz, B. (1995). Cultural values in learning and education. In B. Williams (ed.), Closing
         the achievement gap: A vision for changing beliefs and practices. Philadelphia: Research for Better Schools.
Honebein, P. C., Duffy, T. M., & Fishman, B. J. (1993). Constructivism and the design of learning environments: Context
         and authentic activities for learning. In T.M. Duffy, J. Lowyck, D.H. Jonassen, and T.M. Welsh (Eds.), Designing
         Environments for Constructivist Learning (pp. 87-108). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Aldine.
Honebein, P.C., Duffy, T. M., & Fishman, B.J. (1993). Constructivism and the design of learning environments: Context
         and authentic activities for learning. In T. M. Duffy, J. Lowyck, D. H. Jonassen, & T. M. Welsh (Eds.), Designing
         environments for constructive learning (pp. 87 ­ 108). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Jonassen,  D. H. (1996).   Computers   in the classroom:  Mindtools for critical thinking.  Englewood     Cliffs, New  Jersey:
         Prentice-Hall.
Jonassen, D., Carr, C., & Hsui-Ping, Y. (1998). Computers as mindtools for engaging learners in critical thinking. Tech
         Trends,43(2) 24-32.
Knuth, R.  A.,  & Cunningham,    D.    J. (1991).  Tools for constructivism. In  T. M.  Duffy     &   D. H. Jonassen   (Eds.),
         Constructivism and the technology of instruction: A conversation (pp.163-187). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence
         Erlbaum Associates.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E.G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, California: Sage.
Maddux, C. D., Johnson, D. L., & Willis, J. (1997). Educational computing: Learning with tomorrow's technologies,
         Second Edition. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Moll, L., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (Spring, 1992). Funds of Knowledge for Teaching: Using a Qualitative
         Approach to Connect Homes and Classrooms. In Theory Into Practice, XXXI.
Payne, K. J., & Biddle, B. J. (1999). Poor School Funding, Child Poverty, and Mathematics Achievement. In Educational
         Researcher (28) 6, 7.
Roehrig-Knapp, L., & Glenn, A. D. (1996). Restructuring Schools with Technology, 14. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusions of Innovation (3rd Ed.). New York: The Free Press.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 289

Sandholtz, J. H., Ringstaff, C., Dwyer, D. C. (1997). Teaching with Technology: Creating Student-Centered Classrooms.
        New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Schifter, D. (1996, March). A constructivist perspective on teaching and learning mathematics. Phi Delta Kappan, 492-499.
Sun, J. Heath, M., Byrom, E., Phlegar, J., & Dimock, V. (2000). Planning into Practice. Durham, NC: Southeast and Islands
        Regional Technology in Education Consortium Partners.
Taylor, P. C., Fraser, B. J., &  Fisher, D. L. (In press). Monitoring  constructivist classroom learning     environments.
        International Journal of Educational Research, pp. 1-11.
Trueba, E. T. (1999). Latinos Unidos: from cultural diversity to the politics of solidarity. Lanham, MD.
