Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page 290

    Constructing Collaborative Pedagogical Situations in
       Classrooms : A Scenario and Role Based Approach
                            Christine Ferraris, Philippe Brunier, Christian Martel.
                "Systèmes communicants" team - Université de Savoie, campus scientifique,
                                       73376 Le Bourget du lac cedex, France
                             christine.ferraris@univ-savoie.fr, christian.martel@univ-savoie.fr.

ABSTRACT
Most CSCL works put forward the fact that learners working together would only need a means of communication. We feel
this is not always sufficient. We have focussed on the collaborative activity itself and the way of enhancing collaboration.
We have proposed a general framework which gives the teacher the possibility of defining and constructing pedagogical
collaborative situations. It is based on regulation functions allowing the teacher to manage groups, to define the roles
played by the participants in a group and to describe the way actions can be performed (by means of scenarios). This
framework has been implemented as an independent software that can be plugged into any collaborative application. It has
already been tested with a collaborative drawing software for young children.

Keywords
Regulation, roles, scenarios, collaborative drawing application, constructing collaborative situations.

INTRODUCTION
Most CSCL works put forward the fact that learners working together would only need a means of communication. We feel
this is not always sufficient. We think that the focus of attention would be the collaborative learning situations themselves
and the way of enhancing the collaborative process. In what follows we present our approach, which consists in giving the
teachers the means of defining, constructing and modifying these collaborative situations. We will first describe some
applications designed in order to create situations in which learners had to collaborate or could discover the benefits of
collaboration. We will then explain our approach and illustrate it on the collaborative drawing software intended for young
children we have developed within the "cartable électronique"® project. We will first present the drawing software before
showing how the teacher can construct collaborative pedagogical scenarios and presenting the underlying theoretical model.
We will then present the very first results of the experiments which have been conducted in three schools.

COLLABORATIVE LEARNING SITUATIONS
A communication oriented approach
Cooperative learning has frequently been seen as a stimulus for individual cognitive development, through its capacity to
stimulate collaboration  and discussion between    learners. Two   major  theoretical    approaches explain the  role of social
interaction in the causation of cognitive development. In the Piagetian approach, cooperative learning is effective because it
promotes the emergence of socio-cognitive conflicts due to different opinions and strategies employed by the partners
(Doise, 1984; Perret-Clermont, 1991). In the Vygotskian perspective (Vygotsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1991), individual change
is presented as the  result of an  internalisation of regulatory  activities, such as co-constructive   processes, through  the
mediation of language. In the situation of learner(s)-computer interaction, the computer is seen as a mechanism to support
social interaction and  to  modify the nature  and  the  efficacy of this interaction    (Blaye, 1991;  Mandl,   1992). Several
experiments report highlighting positive effects of computer-based peer interaction.
So CSCL seems to be an interesting paradigm for learners to learn. That's probably why lots of CSCL environments are
currently being developed. Most of the time, collaboration just relies on the fact that teachers can construct material about
courses and  make   it accessible to learners, generally via  a  web-based    interface. Teachers   and learners also have  the
possibility of communicating by means of commonly-used media : chats, forum or videoconferencing. The focus is thus put
on communication and document sharing : there is no real study of what could and would be a collaborative learning
situation and how the computer could be used to support it.

Enhancing collaboration between learners
Some works have begun to focus on this particular aspect of CSCL, no longer concentrating on communication but rather
on the collaborative activity to be set up. The first example we want to present here is the T3 collaborative writing tool
(Tewissen, 2001) developed within the Nimis European project (Nimis; Hoppe, 2000). This tool allows young children to
"write" words or small sentences phonetically, by assembling phonemes they can pick up from a phoneme table. It has been
used to create a collaborative situation between two children. The phoneme table was split up : one of the children had to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page    291

work with the vowels while the other could only make use of the consonants. Therefore, to complete a word, both children
had to work together.
Kidpad (Benford, 2000) is another example of software which was developed to enhance collaboration between children. It
is a drawing tool with a shared drawing space. Children can draw together and they may not have at their disposal the same
tools, for instance they may not have the same colored crayons. The originality of this software is that the colors of the
crayons are mixed when the crayons are used on the same area. Children are thus invited to collaborate to create new colors
and to enrich their drawings.
(George,   2001) and  the  European  project   NetPro  (Markkanen,  2001)    are also two other   works    in which   a  specific
collaborative activity is considered and tools are developed to support it.

Constructing collaborative situations
The applications presented before have been designed in order to create situations in which learners had to collaborate or
could discover the benefits of collaboration. They are based on predefined scenarios of collaboration that are encoded in
software and that cannot be changed. Our approach is similar but goes one step forward : we want to give the teachers the
means of defining, constructing and modifying these collaborative situations themselves by acting on the software. This
will be done by means of what we call regulation functions. In what follows we will show how to construct these situations
dynamically, through the example of a collaborative drawing application for young children we have developed.

THE     EXAMPLE           OF    A   COLLABORATIVE                DRAWING          APPLICATION              FOR       YOUNG
CHILDREN
The collaborative drawing software
We   have  developed   a  collaborative drawing    software  within the "cartable    électronique"®   project  (see   below)   in
collaboration with teachers and pupils. It is intended to be used mostly in classroom settings, by children aged 5-6 years and
by their teachers. It provides children with the means of working together to produce graphical realisations : drawings and
graphics. Graphics has to be distinguished from drawings. It is also a drawing activity but a very constrained and directed
one. It is used as a pre-writing activity, to develop fine psychomotivity. Children are told what to draw, where and how;
they usually draw curves or "bridges" or "scales", because this is a way of preparing them to acquire the physical abilities
for writing.
We have chosen to install the application not on classical hardware (like personal computers) but on pen tablets. These
tablets have an interactive pressure-sensitive touchscreen. Children can draw on the tablet with a sensitive pen as if they
were drawing with a real pen on a sheet of paper. Tablets are so much more usable by young pupils. Furthermore, they
present the advantage of being easily carried, which is an important feature to consider, as we want children to be able to
use the application in classroom settings but also at home.

The "cartable électronique"® project
In  an attempt  to address the  issues of teaching and  learning  with technologies,   Syscom    has established    the "cartable
électronique"® project. It was inspired by the main object children carry every day when they go to school : the "cartable"
(satchel or schoolbag), which contains books and pens, toys and drawing tools. Technology gives us the opportunity to
reduce the weight of the "cartable" without losing its content. SysCom is working on this project in collaboration with
educational organisations in France (the French Ministry of Education and local authorities representing the Ministry) and
the Department of Savoie local government (Conseil Général).
The long-term goal of the project is to give each people in the education sphere (pupil, student, teacher, family,...) the
possibility to access to several educational services anywhere anytime and to collaborate. The "cartable électronique" has
three main axes of development. The first concerns hardware: people involved in the project participate in the design of
computers adapted to children, mostly wireless ones, as mobility has to be taken into account. The second is the creation of
a  support on   which services  and  applications  can be   put and proposed   to teachers, children  and     their families. An
educational web portal has already been developed to play this role. It has been designed as a CSCW environment based on
the possibility given to  its users to  create and manage   groups  (Martel,   2001;  Portail). The  third is the   services  and
applications one. The collaborative drawing application refers to the first and third dimensions.

Tools for drawing
The drawing application is designed around a series of graphical tools that children pick up and apply using the sensitive
pen. The tools are:
·   crayons of different thickness,
·   a palette to choose the colour of the crayon,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                page                  292

·   an eraser to do fine erasure,
·   a rag to do rough erasure,
·   stamps of various forms (letters, numbers, geometrical forms),
·   an album to arrange the drawings done,
·   scissors to cut out parts of the drawing (a part can then be put in the album or moved around the drawing in order to be
   pasted on it),
·   an "undo" function which makes the drawing go back one step.
These tools can be accessed via the graphical interface shown in figure 1, on which Eloïse and Laetitia have collaboratively
drawn a submarine.

      Figure 1: The interface of the collaborative drawing application
Drawing together
Children can choose to work together or on their own. When working together, each child belongs to one group. In a given
group, each child has his/her own tablet and his/her tools. The children share the same drawing space but not the tools.
When one child modifies something on the current drawing (by drawing, or erasing, or pasting, or cutting, ...) on his/her
pen tablet, the others immediately see what has been changed. It is a WYSIWIS approach, with strict synchronisation of the
different children's views onto a shared workspace. Note that, as tools are not shared, the views onto the tools are not
synchronised. Thus there is no problem of concurrent access to one tool. One child is either working alone, or as a member
of a group. As soon as he/she becomes a member of a group, the drawing of the group appears on his/her tablet : he/she
becomes immediately involved in the collaborative drawing process and can contribute to it. An individual drawing can
thus be shared by the means of group definition.

Pedagogical challenges of the collaborative situation
When the teachers asked us to develop this software, they hoped that such a collaborative situation would be interesting for
children to learn socialisation and develop oral expression, which are two important skills to acquire in primary education.
The experiments we have conducted have actually shown that they were right. As was done in (Benford, 2000) or (Hoppe,
2000), the drawing software we have developed provides opportunities for children to discover the benefits of working
together. They can choose with whom they want to draw and how to proceed: socialisation is thus encouraged by this
means. Oral expression is encouraged by the fact that children, having to achieve a collective task, have the possibility of
discussing and negotiating the way they are going to work (what are they going to draw ? on which part of the screen ? who
does what ? etc.). They can also react to what is happening during the drawing process itself : for example one child can
make suggestions about something new to draw; or they can discover together the need to define "rules" in their group
("hey ! you don't have the right to erase what I have drawn !"), which, once again, is a way of discovering life in a group.
Furthermore, they can be put in situations where one child can help and guide another. For example, in a situation where
children have to make graphics (draw curves for example), one child having difficulties in drawing the curves and one who
is quite a good "curves-drawer" can be members of the same group. So the second one will play the role of "assistant" for
the first one : he will be able to help his friend, to show him how to make the right gesture, in the right direction, etc.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  293

CONSTRUCTING VARIOUS PEDAGOGICAL SITUATIONS
The collaborative drawing software includes functions intended for the teachers allowing them to regulate the drawing
activity. Regulation  here   resides  in the possibility of defining    pedagogical scenarios and submitting the  collaborative
activity to them. The teacher has the specific role of being in charge of the organisation and the management of the groups
and, in a more general way, of all the mechanisms which regulate the group activity. He/she thus has at his/her disposal,
through specific interfaces (see figures 2 and 3), functions allowing him/her:
   1.     to create groups,
   2.     to create roles and attributing roles to the participants,
   3.     to manage scenarios.
All these functions can be activated dynamically, even when children are involved in drawing. It is thus a good way of
giving the teacher the means to influence the way the activity will proceed. It is a way of achieving flexibility in groupware
and co-constructing the activity (Bourguin, 2001).

Creating groups
Creating groups consists in creating an empty group, naming it and putting children in it. For example, in figure 2, the
teacher   has created the   "rabbits" and "classroom"    groups. He/she   is currently working on  the "rabbits" one, which is
represented physically by a square in figure 2. Defining who is a member of that group is just a matter of selecting the icon
representing the pupil, dragging it onto the "rabbits" square and dropping it into the square. This has been done in figure 2
with "Bart" and "Duffy-Duck".

Dealing with roles
The management of roles entails two steps : creating them and attributing them to the children in one group. To create a
role, the teacher has first to name it and to define a set of drawing tools (crayon, eraser, rag, ...) which will be attributed to
the participant playing this role in the group. This may involve the children themselves : the teacher may ask a child the
name of the role she/he wants to play, which tools she/he wants to have at her/his disposal, thus contributing to enhancing
the imagination and creativity of the child. Associating tools to roles is done by means of "drag and drop" facilities. It is
just a matter of picking up a tool and dragging it onto the role to whom the teacher wants to associate it. For example, in
figure 2, the "big rabbit", "red rabbit" and "wizard" roles have been defined ; a "red rabbit" can only use the crayon and the
scissors. The second step consists in attributing the roles thus defined to the children. This is done in the same way : just
picking up a role and dragging it onto the pupil to whom the teacher wants to attribute it. In figure 2, Bart has the role of
"big rabbit". So he will be able to use the tools associated with this role.

                                           Figure 2 : The teacher regulation interface.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                 page 294

Dealing with scenarios
A scenario may be considered as a way of describing the laws, rules and effective uses of a group. It's a kind of story which
describes how an interaction will be performed. It may be used to modify the way an action will occur in a group. It
involves the members of one group through their roles. "We can exchange tools" is an example of a scenario. The teacher
can "play" with scenarios in order to modify the collaborative situation. He/she can select the scenarios which will become
active in a group from a set of predefined ones. This is also done by means of "drag and drop" interface facilities. For
example, in figure 3, the scenario "before erasing, ask the big rabbit" has been chosen and put in the "rabbits" group. This
will entail a change in the way the erasing tools can be used.
Note that defining scenarios (constructing them) is a particular function which, at the present time, cannot be handled by the
teacher, as it supposes being finely aware of the theoretical model underlying the regulation process (see below). So it is
handled by a person whose role is "administrator" (currently the designers of the software). We have developed a separate
interface allowing the administrator to define scenarios and to link them to the methods invocation in the application code
(Ferraris, 2000).

                                   Figure 3: The interface for managing scenarios.

A more general model : the « participation model »
The interfaces offered to the teacher to regulate the collaborative drawing activity are just customized views of a general
model of regulation that we call "the participation model" (Martel, 1998). This model is a proposition to take into account
the social aspects of collaborative work, which most of the time are rarely supported in GroupWare. It proposes to consider the
persons involved in a joint activity as active participants who can organise their activities, define the conditions under which
they will be exercised and negotiate their commitment to these activities. It can enable compromise between the interests of the
group and those of the individuals, between the dependencies that stem from relationships among individuals and their
autonomy.
The objective of the participation model is to organise the shared space, the rules and agreements, the users and their
actions or interactions. It is a conceptual model that describes, formalises and builds the context of the joint activity, the
relationships of dependence and the structure of exchanges within the group. It proposes to describe the arenas (locations)
where the activity will take place, the interactive scenarios guiding the interactions and the actions of the participants, and
the participants themselves. They shall be represented in the arenas by means of computer entities which we call actors and
are socially situated in the arenas by the roles they can play in them. They will acquire the possibility of acting and
contributing to the joint activity through these roles.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page  295

The interactive scenarios describe the social protocols in effect in the group. They were inspired by the dialogue models of
the University of Geneva (Roulet, 1985) that attempt to explain the succession and the interweaving of conversational
exchanges. In the same manner, the scenarios will describe the possible exchanges between participants and define the
possible sequence of these exchanges. This does not entail a rigid and deterministic description of the interactions between
participants (which does not seem possible to us for most joint activities) but rather the furnishing of guides to help the
participants govern their exchanges, such as is proposed by (Bider, 2000) for workflow. From a social point of view, the
interactive scenario constitutes a means of subordinating the activity to the context (cultural, educational, commercial,
technical, etc) in which it occurs and explains the typical sequences for each of these contexts.
Like many works in CSCW, we have been inspired by ethnomethodology and linguistics (Dourish, 1998; Goffman, 1981;
Garfinkel, 1972; Rastier, 1989). We aim to give groupware users the means of co-constructing their environment. We share
here the same approach as (Bardram, 1998; Bourguin, 2001; Fitzpatrick, 1995; Tolone, 1996).

Pedagogical challenges.
The regulation  functions appear  to    be  a good way    of giving   the teacher the  means of creating   various pedagogical
situations. He/she  can focus  on the     collaborative  activity and   imagine   as many   situations as possible  to enhance
collaboration. He/she can also involved the children in the definition of these situations and make them react to scenarios
that were used or lead them to discover the need for rules.
Regulation is teacher-centered in this application. The teacher builds situations in which the children simultaneously play
with tools and talk about them. The activity needs not only to be explained to the children but also to be negotiated with
them, step by step. That's why we aim to move towards pupil-centered regulation, which will allow the children to take the
activity in hand and to organize the framework of cooperation. This will take advantage of the reflexive feature of the
regulation model.

TECHNICAL FEATURES
Concerning the drawing application
The application has been developed with the JAVA language and can thus be installed on various operating systems (we
have already tried successfully to make it run on heterogeneous OS machines including Linux, windows NT and windows
95). We used the SWING package for the design of the interfaces and the RMI mechanism for communication between the
tablets. In order to synchronize the updates on the shared drawing space, a server for each group has been implemented. It
centralizes the events corresponding to the new pieces of drawing coming from the different tablets and redistributes them.

The Regulation level
The participation  model  has been      implemented   in JAVA     as an independent   software that can   be plugged   into any
collaborative application, providing that the application has an API which allows the events generated by the users to be
intercepted and to modify the methods invocation. The API must specify at least who is involved in the collaborative
process and what actions can be performed (what tools are at the participants' disposal).

How the regulation level operates
In a non-regulated collaborative application, when a user activates a tool by acting upon the interface, the event generated by
the interface modifies the application model directly. Our approach is to reroute the events and to send them to a specific
regulation component called a filter that will be able to know if the actions corresponding to the events have to be regulated
or not. If this is the case, the events will be transferred to the decision center which will treat them. This component is in
charge of the management of the scenarios : it uses a regulation motor to select and activate them. The last regulation
component is the "execution mechanism" which makes the connection between the actions in the scenarios and the method
calls in the collaborative application.

ONGOING EXPERIMENTS
In order to  validate our approach      and the regulation   functions, experiments   were conducted   in collaboration with  a
researcher from the department of psychology of the University of Savoie. They involved 43 children coming from three
classes of  three schools in the neighborhood      of Chambéry     (Savoie  - France).  The children   were  given in  turn two
collaborative tasks of drawing: a free one, which consisted in drawing what they wanted, and a constrained one, which
consisted in reproducing a model of a drawing (a car, a house, ...) in which various colors and thickness of crayon were
used. Groups of two or three children were constructed to manage these tasks. As one of the pedagogical challenges is to
develop oral expression, the experiments were conducted in face to face settings. The children were thus able to see and
speak with each other.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 296

There were mainly two situations in the experiments : the first one during which traditional material was used (sheets of
paper and real crayons),    and the  computer-mediated  situation.    For the latter, the drawing software  was used with the
interactive pen tablets in a regulated way and without regulation. The idea here was to compare a classical situation with the
computer-mediated one, and a regulated situation with a non-regulated one.
The materials used to analyze the results of the experiments are the drawings done by the children and their verbalizations
during the collaborative process. They are currently being analyzed, the drawings regarding their conformity to the given
instruction, the verbalizations regarding the fact that they enhance collaboration or not. At the present time, we have only
partial results, so we are not able to present full results in this paper (we will do it in a future publication). However, the
initial results have already led us to establish the fact that regulation is useful in learning collaborative behavior. We expect
the final results to confirm this conclusion. Meanwhile, we present in what follows the methodology defined to conduct the
analyses. We are going to describe the way regulation can be analysed, the variables introduced to compare regulated
situations and non-regulated ones, the outcome expected and the way collaboration can be measured.

How to analyze regulation: variables considered.
Two ideal models enabled us to explain the mechanism of regulation and to isolate relevant variables to experiment it with
respect to the expected teaching considerations.
The instrumental theory, on the one hand (Rabardel, 1995), makes it possible to consider the tool not according to the uses
prescribed or envisaged, but according to its capacity to be integrated by the subjects like a means to achieve their goals.
This theory allowed us to isolate the conditions under which regulation should be effective before evaluating how it could
support collaborative processes between two partners. The variation of the type of task (free task or constrained task)
enabled us to show the importance of the specification of the conditions of learning. In the free situation of drawing, the
children carry out the drawing of their choice. The only constraint is to manage prior agreement to the production of the
drawing. In the situation of constrained drawing, the children must reproduce a model of drawing.
These two tasks do not refer to the same field of learning. The free situation of drawing refers to the field of creativity,
whereas the situation of constrained drawing refers to the field of collaborative learning. The goal of regulation is mainly to
support collaborative processes in the interaction between two partners, and not to support creative processes. It thus
appears obvious that a facilitator effect of regulation will be expected in the situation of constrained drawing: regulation
increasing the interdependence of the subjects in interaction and leading them to build a joint definition of the situation of
training. In free situations of drawing, the model of learning implemented is creativity. However, constraining the activity
of the subjects interacting does not appear relevant to support this type of creative learning. This variation of the conditions
of learning thus enables    us to expose the  expected  teaching    considerations clearly, according to  the adequacy of the
characteristics of regulation with the characteristics of the task.
The goal of regulation is to support collaborative activity: the teaching situations will have to be defined according to this
goal, and not in a general way, without consideration of the field of learning of reference. Eventually, this variation should
make it possible for the teachers to use regulation in a relevant way, while enabling them to take into account the conditions
necessary for the emergence of a collaborative process.
The theory of the activity, in addition, explains the effectiveness of the tool according to whether it is or not in the proximal
zone of development of the subject, i.e. between what the subject is able to achieve alone and what it cannot do without
external assistance (Kaptelinin, 1996). It will enable us to answer the question of the adequacy of the tool to the cognitive
capacities of the children.
Practically, we thus chose to limit in this first phase of experiment the use of regulation to its simplest application, but also
most fundamental: the fact of forcing the activity of the subjects or not, in allotting them turns at roles. When the activity is
controlled, the tools are distributed between the two partners. Subject 1 does not have the same tools as subject 2. The idea
is then to generate a complementarity between the two partners, a need for taking account of the actions of the other in the
realisation of the task. When the activity is not controlled, the subjects have the same tools. They can thus carry out the task
in an isolated way, without dialogue necessary with the partner before any action on the system.
The   comparison of these    two  situations appeared necessary     to us to  validate the effectiveness of the mechanism  of
regulation on children of this age. Indeed, it is not so easy for children of that age to be decentred from their own point of
view to take account of the point of view of their partner. We thus postulate a facilitator effect of regulation on the
collaborative learning only if the situation of training generated is in the proximal zone of development of the child. The
comparison of these two types of situations should enable us to account for the adequacy of the tool to the cognitive
capacities of children of that age.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   297

Expectations for the outcome of the investigations
The characteristics of the free task of drawing should promote processes of learning such as creativity, less compatible with
the expected   learning objective,  which  is collaboration. The  characteristics of the task of constrained    drawing  should
support processes of collaborative learning.
Regulation should increase the level of interaction of the subjects in the task of constrained drawing, by allowing the
partners greater discussion and greater negotiation before any machine response. It should decrease their level of interaction
in the free task of drawing, by supporting conflicts over resources and ideas.

Measures used
The measures used enabled us to analyze the two levels of interaction of a subject with his/her partner and the device. It
relates to the cognitive aspects of the work of the subject in the course of action. The analysis of the course of action is
carried out through the study of the interpersonal functioning communication. All the interactions were filmed and tape-
recorded to allow this evaluation of the cognitive child work in the course of action. The method of analysis of the course of
action consists of a synthetic-progressive method, which makes it possible to explain how the subject includes/understands
new information on the basis of its knowledge. The chronicle of the course of action thus released makes it possible to
account for the various stages of the inferential process of (1) proposition, (2) explanation, (3) execution and (4) control
(Gilly, 1984; Saint-Pierre, 1998). This analysis of verbalizations also makes it possible to categorize the various cognitive
acts according to whether they support the interaction or not. For example, the fact of proposing a joint action and of
awaiting the answer of his/her partner is an action considered as supporting the interaction ("I draw the circle and you the
square,  ok?") whereas   an isolated  execution  without  preliminary dialogue    with the partner is regarded   as a negative
cognitive act for the interaction.
A percentage of reduction in the initial actions of the subjects in particular units of language was also calculated, making it
possible to account for the sequences of the actions, a long sequence being regarded as favourable to the interaction.
A percentage of stages in the correct sequence's inferential processes was also produced, making it possible to account for
the respect of the actions and entries of language which respect the process of speech development. According to this
process, a proposal must always be preliminary to an explanation or simultaneous with an execution, an explanation must
be preliminary to an execution, an execution must follow a proposal or must be simultaneous with an explanation, a control
must follow an execution.
A positive effect of regulation on the task of constrained drawing should be translated by a strong percentage of cognitive
acts preliminary to the action (proposal, explanation) and a small percentage of concomitant or consecutive cognitive acts
to the action (execution, control), a high percentage of cognitive acts supporting the interaction, an extreme percentage of
reduction in the initial actions in particular units of language, a significant percentage of stages of the correct sequence's
inferential processes. The effect of regulation on the free task of drawing should be translated by the effects opposite to
those observed during the task of constrained drawing.

ASSESSMENT AND FUTURE WORK
The experiments are now finished and we are waiting for more detailed results. They have mainly focussed on the children
at work and on the pertinence of regulation, as this have seemed to be the prerequisite of more complex ones. We think that
we have now to pursue them by involving the teachers more. Actually, as one of the reviewers of this paper has noticed, it
is probably a very new task for the teachers to design or to facilitate the designing of the scenarios and the cooperative
situations. We thus particularly have to give them more time to think up pertinent and richer scenarios. We will work with
them on the construction of those scenarios. Then we will have to enter the second and maybe most important phase of
experimentation with the model: a learning situation intended no more for the children but for the teacher to manage
scenarios.
We also have to work on a formalism that they would be able to manipulate via an appropriate interface in order to give
them the possibility of constructing the scenarios themselves. We have actually noticed that this is done by the designers of
the software as the formalism used to express the scenarios strongly relies on the participation model.
Finally, we  will soon   be focussing   on the  reflexive feature of  the participation  model.  Actually,    regulation can be
considered as a collaborative activity which can itself be regulated. Within this activity, the teacher has the special role of
"regulator". This role allows him/her to use the specific tools of regulation. It could be played by a pupil.

CONCLUSION
We have presented, through the example of a collaborative drawing application designed for young children, a generic
framework of regulation intended for teachers to create original collaborative situations. Teachers can modify the way the
drawing application operates by means of this framework. It is based on a theoretical model called "the participation
model", which aims to take into account the social aspects of collaborative work.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   298

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank very much Laurence FOUBERT-GAGNIERE who had led the experiments with the children in the
schools, with the point of view of a psychologist. She is currently analyzing their results in a detailed way.

REFERENCES
Bardram  J. (1998)  Designing  for the  Dynamics      of Cooperative  Work    Activities. Proceedings    of the ACM    CSCW'98
        conference, ACM Press.
Benford S., and al. (2000) Designing Storytelling Technologies to Encourage Collaboration between Young Children.
        Proceedings of the ACM DIS'2000 conference.
Bider I., and Khomyakov M. (2000) Is it possible to Make Workflow Management Systems Flexible ? Dynamic Systems
        Approach    to Business   Processes.  Proceedings     of  CRIWG'2000,      6th international  workshop     on groupware
        (Madeira, Portugal, October 2000), 138-141
Blaye A., Light P., Joiner R., and Sheldon S. (1991) Collaboration as a facilitator of planning and problem solving on a
        computer-based task. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9, 471-483.
Bourguin  G., and  Derycke  A.  (2001)    Integrating  the CSCL    Activities into Virtual  Campuses   : Foundations   of  a  new
        Infrastructure for Distributed  Collective    Activities. Proceedings   of Euro-Cscl    2001, (Maastricht,   Netherlands,
        March 2001).
Doise W., and Mugny G. (1984) The social development of the intellect. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Dourish P., and Button G. (1998) On "technomethodology": Foundational Relationship between Ethnomethodology and
        System Design. Human Computer Interaction, 13, N°4, 1998.
Ferraris C., and Martel C. (2000) Regulation in groupware: the Example of a Collaborative Drawing Tool for Young
        Children. Proceedings of CRIWG'2000, 6th international workshop on groupware (Madeira, Portugal, October
        2000), 119-127.
Fitzpatrick G., Tolone W. J., and Kaplan S. M. (1995) Work, Locales and Distributed Social Worlds. Proceedings of the
        ECSCW'95, (Stockholm, Sweden, September 1995), 1-16.
Garfinkel H., and Sacks H. (1972) Contributions in Ethnomethodology, Bloomington, Indiana University Press.
George S., and Leroux p; (2001) Project-based Learning as a Basis for a CSCL Environment : An Example in Educational
        Robotics. Proceedings of Euro-Cscl 2001, (Maastricht, Netherlands, March 2001).
Gilly M., and Roux J.P. (1984). Efficacité comparative du travail individual et du travail en interaction socio-cognitive dans
        l'appropriation et la mise en oeuvre d'une procédure de résolution chez les enfants de 11 à 12 ans. Cahiers de
        Psychologie Cognitive, 4, 171-188.
Goffman E (1981) Forms of Talk. Philadelphia, Univ. of Pennsylvania Press.
Hoppe U., and al. (2000) Supporting collaborative activities in Computer integrated Classrooms - the NIMIS approach.
        Proceedings of CRIWG'2000, 6th international workshop on groupware (Madeira, Portugal, October 2000), 94-
        101.
Kaptelinin, V. (1996). Activity Theory : Implications for Human-Computer Interaction. In Nardi, B.A. (Eds), Context and
        Consciousness: activity theory and Human-Computer Interaction, Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press, 103-116.
Mandl H., and Renkl A. (1992) A plea for more local theories of cooperative learning. Learning and Instruction, 2, 281-
        285.
Markkanen H. (2001) NetPro : methodologies and tools for Project Based Learning in Internet. Proceedings of Ed-Media
        2001, World Conference On Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunication, (Tampere, Finland,
        June 2001).
Martel C.  (1998)  La  modélisation   des activités   conjointes. Rôles,  places   et positions des  participants. Thesis  of the
        University of Savoie, September 1998.
Martel C., and Vignollet L. (2001) Educational Web Portal based on personalized and collaborative services. Proceedings
        of ICALT (International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies), (Madison, USA, August 2001).
Nimis Project. http://collide.infomatik.uni-duisburg.de/Projects/nimis.
Perret-Clermont A-N.,   Perret J. F., and  Bell N.     (1991) The  social construction   of meaning   and   cognitive activity in
        elementary school children. L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared
        cognition, Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Portail. http://portail.univ-savoie.fr:8080/cellule.
Rabardel, P. (1995). Les Hommes et Les Technologies; approche cognitive des instruments contemporains. Paris : A.Colin.
Rastier F (1989) Sens et textualité. Hachette, Paris.
Roulet E.,  Auchlin A.,  Moeschler    J., Rubattel    C. and  Schelling   M.  (1985)   L'articulation du    discours  en français
        contemporain. Peter Lang, Berne.
Saint-Pierre, M. (1998). Une approche pragmatique cognitive de l'interaction personne/système informatisé. ALSIC, 1, 1,
        27-36.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                   page   299

Tewissen F., Lingnau A., Hoppe U., Mannhaupt G., and Nischk D. (2001) Collaborative Writing in a Computer-integrated
       Classroom for Early Learning. Proceedings of Euro-Cscl 2001, (Maastricht, Netherlands, March 2001).
Tolone W. J. (1996) Introspect: a Meta-level Specification Framework for Dynamic, Evolvable Collaboration Support.
       Ph.D. Thesis. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Vygotsky L. S. (1978) Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press,
       Cambridge.
Wertsch J. V. (1991) A sociocultural approach to socially shared cognition. L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine,, & S. D. Teasley
       (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition, Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
