Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page      300

I. (PEDAGOGY TRACK): CSCL IN THE BROADER SOCIAL CONTEXT
         Web Resource Collaboration Center (WRCC): An
             Integrated Tool to Support Lifelong Learning
                                                  Joanna C. Dunlap
                                          University of Colorado at Denver
                                          Joni_Dunlap@ceo.cudenver.edu
ABSTRACT
Influenced by EPSS, generative learning, and intentional learning strategies, a Web-based tool ­ called the Web Resource
Collaboration Center (WRCC) ­ was developed to support learning communities in building their own Web-based learning
and   performance  support systems    to support  lifelong learning and    professional development.   Using     various  online
communication and collaboration technologies, the WRCC is designed to not only enable learning communities to (1) build
a learning and professional development resource that will provide them with immediate support and guidance and (2) help
them develop structure, strategies, and skills for subsequent lifelong learning and professional development activities, but
also (3) take responsibility for creating original resources that support lifelong learning and professional development.

Keywords
Lifelong learning, professional development, learning communities, EPSS, generative and intentional learning

INTRODUCTION
In the present climate of continual change and innovation, developing lifelong learning skills is a critical educational goal.
To keep current in their fields, people have to be willing and able to continually update their knowledge and skills. The
need for continuous learning is especially apparent in ill-structured domains--such as medicine, law, business, engineering,
and information technology ­ because of the overwhelming explosion of information and technological advances. At the
same time, employers want employees who can "retool" overnight; if organizational needs change at the speed of sound,
then employees need to become lifelong learners and keep up with the pace. Many people look to the Web as an on-demand
source to support lifelong learning and professional development activities. However, the Web itself is not necessarily
designed to efficiently or effectively support these activities; Web resources are not organized by specific project, problem
of practice, context, or domain, making it difficult to find what you need when you need it.
Although  employees'  ability  to  engage  in lifelong learning and  professional development     has  a  direct impact    on  an
organization's effectiveness in today's ever-changing marketplace, many employers have neglected the development of the
skills needed to engage in perpetual learning activities. Organizations rely on short-term solutions, such as conventional
training where trainers impart knowledge and procedures to employees using canned, inflexible instructional materials that
often do not reflect the true complexity of an ever-changing work environment. (Unfortunately, this is the case whether we
are describing instructor-led, computer-based,    or Web-based   training.) After the   training activity is  over, employees
struggle with applying what they learned from their training experience to the demands of their jobs. Not only does the
conventional training solution  not   accurately represent the  on-the-job  performance  requirements,    but also  it does   not
prepare the employees to:
    Transfer the knowledge and skills to their specific job requirements,
    Extend the knowledge and skills presented during training to address increasingly complex job requirements, or
    Update the knowledge and skills presented during training when their job requirements change or the knowledge and
    skills change.
To address these shortcomings, some organizations have implemented electronic performance support systems (EPSS) to
replace or augment conventional training. An EPSS is an integrated database of information, tools, learning experiences,
resources, and guidance/advise designed to help people learn how to perform a task just-in-time and in context (e.g., on-the-
job).
However, the problem with conventional training is also, in part, the problem with EPSS ­ as I discovered firsthand while
working with the organization described below. Instructional designers working with content experts typically develop
EPSS   products. They create   all of the tools, references, job aids, and  tutorials to meet    the generic  needs    of all the
individuals who will access it. EPSS limits individualization because it assumes that everyone who needs to access the
EPSS has the same performance issues, learning needs, and learning preferences. Issues of transfer, extension, and updating
are not effectively addressed  by   EPSS.  In addition, like with conventional  training  solutions,  all of  the  higher-order
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   301

thinking, problem-solving, and decision-making that goes into creating the "content" of an EPSS -- all of the activity that
helps people develop domain-specific lifelong learning skills -- is done by the development team.

Facing the Challenge
A few years ago, I was hired by an information technology organization (let's call it ITO) to "get to the bottom" of why its
elaborate EPSS which was available on the company's intranet was not being utilized by employees. The company had
used its training and development resources to build this EPSS to help employees keep up with all of the new technologies
they were expected to master for the various projects the organization was taking on. Since a front-end analysis was not
actually conducted before the development of the EPSS (the decisions were made based on anecdotal information and a
desire to use "cool" technology, which many of us are guilty of at some point in our development work), this is where I
started. The employees liked that the EPSS provided a variety of resources (e.g., tutorials, white papers, job aids, business
cases, etc.) to support their various learning needs and preferences. Instead of conventional training (which could not help
them keep up with their changing needs), they wanted access to learning and professional development resources that
would help them keep their knowledge and skills "cutting edge". So, although they were not against the idea of an EPSS,
they did not believe that the developers of the EPSS understood what resources they needed, and certainly did not know
how to present them in contextualized ways (e.g., resources that would help with one type of project vs. another type of
project). They were also concerned that there was no way to capture the "here's how I did it" expertise of the people in the
organization, and in the external community of practice. In addition, the EPSS was static ­ the information and tools related
to the technologies    these employees    were  using was   constantly evolving and  being  upgraded.   The most     up-to-date
information  was  being   distributed on  the Web.  The EPSS    was not  dynamic  enough to  capture  those changes,    so   the
employees were using the Web to support their learning and professional development ­ albeit not very efficiently, which
led to frustration. Bottom line, they had been cut out of the process, and believed that they were better judges of what was
needed to support their learning and work.
This consultation led to my interest in developing a tool that would (1) take advantage of some of the structural qualities of
EPSS, (2) harness the resources on the Web (since it was a distribution source for some of the most up-to-date information
and tools), and (3) provide a structure for learning communities and communities of practice to build their own unique
content to support both lifelong learning and professional development activities. To meet this challenge, we created a
Web-based development tool called the Web Resource Collaboration Center (WRCC). This tool was designed to help
learners take advantage of the wealth of resources available on the Web during on-the-job professional development as well
as lifelong learning activities. Influenced structurally by EPSS and conceptually by generative and intentional learning
strategies, the WRCC      provides a  structure for  people  in workplace  and  educational settings to generate     their own,
collaboratively built Web-based learning and performance support systems. After a number of redesign iterations based on
continual needs assessments and formative evaluations with both organizational and higher education groups, the WRCC
has been implemented in over ten settings. This paper describes the WRCC design decisions, and reports on the use of this
tool with three specific learning communities.

STRUCTURAL AND CONCEPTIONAL FOUNDATIONS FOR THE WRCC
Based on my work with the ITO learning community, EPSS seemed to provide a good structural starting place as a way of
organizing Web resources because it:
4.  Provides an integrated database of learning and professional development resources;
5.  Provides    access to a  variety  of different resources to  support people with different learning  needs,     preferences,
    maturity, style, and expertise; and
6.  Is designed to help people learn in context, while they are on the job or working on a particular problem (although,
    because of the over-generalization of the content, EPSS does not do this well).
However, it still did not adequately address the need for knowledge building by the community itself to support their
specific lifelong learning and professional development needs. Therefore, I turned to the literature for conceptual guidance.
This led me to generative learning and intentional learning.

Generative Learning
Generative learning directs students to take responsibility for determining what it is about a particular domain they need to
know, and then directs their activities accordingly to effectively research, synthesize, and present their findings (Cognition
and Technology Group at Vanderbilt, 1992; Hannafin, 1992). Some generative learning activities provide students with a
context or situation requiring them to take action (e.g., a problem that needs to be solved or a case that needs to be
analyzed). Other types of generative learning activities require students to determine what it is about a particular content
area they wish to know, and then take responsibility for answering their own questions through research and synthesis and
representing the acquired knowledge in an organized and accessible way. This process of "generating" knowledge ­ instead
of passively receiving information ­ helps learners develop structure, strategies, and habit for lifelong learning.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page   302

Schank and Jona (1991) describe generative learning in their discussion on the research method of teaching. Under the
research method of teaching, students are asked to research a particular topic and then present their results to others (the
class, a  collaborative group,  etc.). In this way,   students are taking   over  the  responsibility of  information   gathering,
synthesis, and dissemination/presentation from the teacher. For this teaching method to lead to successful learning, students
need to be allowed to select their own topics to research and report on, so that they have a real interest in proceeding with
the assignment and have more control over their learning. Teachers often have to help students find something to research
that is relevant and meaningful to them while still meeting learning objectives and outcomes ­ this requires strong teacher
guidance, coaching,   and  scaffolding.   Because students  are responsible   for selecting  a topic, developing    a question  to
research, making   decisions   about   how to  gather information,  analyzing    and   synthesizing  information,   etc., they  are
engaging in activities that help to develop high-level thinking and problem solving abilities (Bruner, 1961).

Intentional Learning
Intentional learning requires learners to be actively in control of the learning process (Resnick, 1989). Palincsar and Klenk
(1992) describe intentional learning as an achievement resulting from the learner's purposeful, effortful, self-regulated, and
active engagement; it refers to the "cognitive processes that have learning as a goal rather than an incidental outcome"
(Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1989, p. 363). Intentional learning's objective is to create a supportive structure in which students
can engage in cooperative knowledge building as they move towards greater autonomy. Addressing students' need for
higher-order thinking and learning skills, intentional learning helps students develop the general metacognitive and self-
directed  learning skills that facilitate autonomous   lifelong learning    (Palincsar, 1990;  Scardamalia,  Bereiter,    McLean,
Swallow, & Woodruff, 1989), specifically the abilities to:
    -     Monitor and assess how they learn, think, and solve problems, and make adjustments when necessary;
    -     Make maximum use of existing knowledge;
    -     Ask questions to identify knowledge deficits and set personal learning goals to address those deficits;
    -     Utilize learning strategies other than rehearsal to attain learning goals;
    -     Access, apply, and evaluate appropriate resources, including peers and teachers; and
    -     Manage the learning process (e.g., set goals, create action plans, identify appropriate learning strategies).
Students develop these skills by engaging in situations in which they need to build a body of knowledge based on their
learning interests using a variety of information resources. Structure and teacher facilitation is provided throughout the
knowledge building process to prompt, assess, and redirect ­ if necessary ­ students; again, like in generative learning
settings, the teacher is very involved in guiding, coaching, and scaffolding students to ensure intentional learning outcomes.
While building the knowledge base, students practice tactics for making claims, collecting evidence in support of their
claims, and evaluating and responding to counterarguments from peers and teachers. Through this knowledge-building
process,  students reflect on   specific  aspects of  their learning    and thinking    processes, and  consider  the   effects of
collaboration on each other's learning, such as the impact of opinion, bias, controversy, debate, and negotiation (Glaser,
1991).
Additionally, intentional learning prepares students for self-directed learning activities by helping them learn how to ask
questions based    on personal  knowledge   deficits  and formulate  learning  goals    to address  those deficits. Research    by
Scardamalia and Bereiter (1991) indicates that students can learn to ask questions to guide their knowledge building, thus
assuming more control and ownership over their learning activities. Because intentional learning emphasizes question
generation to guide goal attainment, students acquire ownership over learning activities, find personal relevance during
learning activities, and develop skills needed to be lifelong learners.

Common Instructional Strategies to Support WRCC Design Decisions
Generative and intentional learning approaches employ common instructional strategies to encourage lifelong learning and
contextualized, relevant knowledge building. These strategies had a direct influence on the specific design components and
use of the WRCC, specifically learner autonomy, collaboration, and reflection.

Learner Autonomy
To be autonomous learners, people have to know how to plan their learning: address learning needs, set learning objectives,
employ learning strategies, utilize resources, and assess the overall process. They need to acquire more agency over their
zones of proximal development by being self-directed learners. Barrows (1986) defines the process of self-directed learning
as utilizing the following skills:
1.  Identify and define a problem/learning need;
2.  Identify, find, use, and critique resources for solving the problem or meeting the learning requirement;
3.  Capture and apply information from resources to the problem or learning need; and
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  303

4.  Critique information, skills, and processes used to solve the problem or meet the learning requirement (an especially
    important skill for using the Web).

Collaboration
Learning takes place in a social context; higher cognitive processes originate from social interactions (Vygotsky, 1978),
with knowledge acquisition "firmly embedded in the social and emotional context in which learning takes place" (Lebow,
1993, p. 6). Conversation,  communication,    and   establishing  a community   of learners are  critical   to the  teaching and
learning process (Pask, 1975). Collaboration:
1    Elevates  thinking, learning,   and  problem    solving to   an  observable status   (Glaser, 1991),      making   students'
     metacognitive  processes   apparent. This provides  students   with opportunities for  understanding      and sharing  these
     processes -- refining, strengthening, and extending their metacognitive skills (Von Wright, 1992).
2    Gives rise synergistically to insights and solutions that would not come about individually; learners working together
     collaboratively can often successfully tackle complex problems that individuals working alone would not be able to
     handle.
3    Displays multiple viewpoints leading to the conceptual growth that comes from sharing perspectives and testing ideas
     with others (Bednar, Cunningham, Duffy, & Perry, 1991).

Reflection
The process of reflection is the ability to think about one's self as an intentional subject of personal actions and to consider
the consequences and efficacy of those actions (Von Wright, 1992). This involves the ability to look at one's self in an
objective way and to consider ways of changing to improve performance; in other words, it requires metacognitive skills.
Von Wright (1992) defines metacognitive skills as "the steps that people take to regulate and modify the progress of their
cognitive activity: to learn such skills is to acquire procedures which regulate cognitive processes" (p.64). Metacognitive
skills include taking conscious control of learning, planning and selecting strategies, monitoring the progress of learning,
correcting errors, analyzing the effectiveness of learning strategies, and changing learning behaviors and strategies when
necessary (Ridley, Schultz, Glanz, & Weinstein, 1992).

THE WRCC COMPONENTS
After determining the structural and conceptual frameworks based on front-end analysis and a review of the literature, I
started working with a computer programmer to develop a tool for learning communities to use to build their own lifelong
learning and   professional development    systems.   After  a   number  of  implementation    and   feedback    iterations  with
organizational and higher education groups, we chose the best ­ at least for the moment ­ configuration of EPSS structure
and generative and intentional learning strategies.
By  creating a structure that supports  collaborative  knowledge    building by  the people who    will actually    be using the
knowledge, the higher-order thinking, problem-solving, and decision-making involved in the selection and utilization of
appropriate  learning materials and  performance    support  is  done by those  who   can  get the most     out of  the process.
Additionally, because these activities happen within the framework of a learning community and are driven by the needs of
the job, challenge, or interest at hand, the learning activities are contextualized, authentic, and meaningful. Therefore, the
WRCC was designed to meet the following goals:
·   Learning community members learn about the domain while they are locating, evaluating (which requires utilization of
    resources), organizing, and creating resources to support their learning and job performance activities ­ making the
    process relevant and productive;
·   The content of the WRCC is information which has been applied/articulated from the perspective of reflective practice,
    making the WRCC a knowledge management forum;
·   The WRCC is developed by and for the people involved in the project, challenge, context, or domain;
·   Because the learning community controls the content, the WRCC can change and adapt based on the changing learning
    or professional development needs; and
·   Once a WRCC is developed it can be used to support continued learning and professional development.
In this way,  the WRCC    was   designed  to not only  enable   a learning community   to  build a learning     and professional
development   resource that will provide   members    with  immediate  support  and  guidance,   but also   help   them develop
structure, strategies, and skills for subsequent lifelong learning and professional development activities.
To provide a structure for these activities, the WRCC is broken into three EPSS-influenced functional areas that support the
common instructional strategies ­ learner autonomy, collaboration, and reflection ­ prescribed by generative and intentional
learning methodologies.  The   three functional  areas are   the  Discussion Forum,   the Link   Manager,      and the  Resource
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 304

Construction System. [Note: These tools ­ written entirely in Perl ­ are not unique ­ there are similar tools available from a
variety of sources. The impact is in the use and integration of the tools, and the fact that they are Open Source.]

The Discussion Forum
The Discussion Forum provides a structure for capturing the "here's how I did it" expertise that exists within the learning
community itself, as well as information that is unique to the community (see Figure 1). Using the Discussion Forum,
learners can post questions, issues, problems, etc., and receive feedback from other WRCC participants. It enables learning
community members to work together to share ideas and work through challenges. It also provides a forum for coaching
and mentoring activities.
Figure 1. Practitioner forum for JavaScript and PHP programmers

The Link Manager
The Link Manager helps learners collaboratively categorize, assess, and utilize Web-based resources. Learners use the Link
Manager to categorize and critique resources found on the Web (see Figure 2). When a resource on the Web is added to the
Link Manager, specific information (determined by the learning community based on their purpose) must be added, such
as:
·   The name and URL of the resource
·   A description of the site
·   Learning and/or professional development need/s addresses
·   Type of learning supported and/or the complexity level of the site
·   The site's strengths and weaknesses
Administrators who have different needs are able to customize the Link Manger to request different information
from people submitting links. For example, the complexity level, strengths and weaknesses could easily be
replaced with a single text area asking for a critique of the site and a popup menu with the options "thumbs up"
and "thumbs down".
Figure 2. Example of the Link Manager completed entry

Resource Construction System
Sometimes there are learning and performance needs that cannot be effectively addressed using existing Web resources.
This may be because the learning or performance need revolves around a new technology, or an organization-specific issue
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                     page 305

not well represented on the Web. Or, resources may be available on the Web, but not in a format that is effective for all
learners. To address this issue, the WRCC provides a learner-centered tool for developing unique resources ­ the Resource
Construction System (RCS).
The RCS combines the technologies of document sharing and asynchronous threaded communication to create
an environment in which learners can collaboratively develop ­ from scratch ­ their own Web-based resources.
The document-sharing feature:
1.  Enables learners to track and archive various versions of new resource documents,
2.  Utilizes asynchronous threaded discussion technology to allow reflective discussion around the development of new
    Web-based resources, and
3.  Provides easy uploading and downloading of resource documents for revision purposes.
The RCS allows the learning community to build their own Web resources online. To accomplish this a learner must first
create a Project on the system. Once a project is added to the RCS, any number of documents may be added to the project
(see Figure 3). Typically, documents added to projects are HTML documents.
Figure 3. Discussion Posting in Resource Construction System

Once a document is added to a project, learners may view the document through the System. Learners collaborate on
changes, additions, and deletions that should be made to the document through a threaded discussion forum attached to the
document. Once consensus is reached on discussed changes, one of the learners will make the actual changes to the
document and then post a new revision to the RCS. The collaboration process then repeats for the new revision of the
document if necessary. Each revision of a document has its own discussion forum. When browsing a project, learners are
not only able to see any revision of a document, but they also see the historical discussion that took place over an older
revision and may participate in the discussion of a current revision.
The RCS is very intelligent when handling HTML documents. When a new revision of an HTML document is added to the
RCS, the RCS internally calculates the differences between the previous revision and the newly checked-in revision. As
with any type of document, when a learner clicks on a revision's icon, they see the rendered document in a separate
window. However, with HTML documents, if they click on the revision icon a second time, learners see the annotated
version of new revision. Any text removed from the previous revision is shown in strikethrough text, and any text added to
the previous revision is shown in a green font (see Figure 4).
Figure 4. Example of document under construction in the Resource Construction System

HTML   documents frequently  have images embedded within           them   and may  have other media embedded  (such as
background music or a Shockwave plug-in). The RCS supports this by allowing learners to "attach" media to a given
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                       page    306

document    so that the   document       renders   correctly     when   presented      to  learners.   Although     the   RCS       only   annotates    the
differences between revisions of HTML documents, the RCS is capable of managing revisions of any type of document.
Examples    of different   documents       learners  could    collaborate       on  and    revise   include   images,     audio,      video,   PDF     files,
Microsoft Word documents, etc. Figure 3 shows the "Sam-I-Am" team working on HTML, text, and image documents to
support their software design project.

Summary
The  WRCC      provides   a   structure   for  learning communities         to  engage     in   active   knowledge      building      and  collaborative
construction of new resources based on specific lifelong learning and professional development goals and needs. It does
this by employing the instructional strategies prescribed by generative and intentional learning ­ namely, learner autonomy,
collaboration, and reflection ­ within an EPSS-like structure (see Table 1).
Table 1. Relationship of generative and intentional learning strategies to WRCC functional areas
                       Discussion Forum                                 Link Manager                            Resource Construction System
Learner         Learners  ask questions  based on    Supports   goal-driven activity:  learners add to and     Based on the needs and goals of the
Autonomy        their own goals and needs.           access   the Link  Manager     to locate  resources  to   learners   building     the   WRCC,
                                                     support  learning  goals.  Learners   decide  what   is   learners determine   what   additional
                                                     included and excluded from the resource database.         resources  need     to  be  built  for
                                                     Provides   access to   variety of  learning  resources    inclusion in the Link Manager.
                                                     based   on   learning  needs,  goals, strategies, and
                                                     preferences, and level of expertise/maturity.
Collaboration   Learners are exposed to a variety    Guiding collaborative knowledge building: Because         Learners   work   together   to build
                of   ideas,     solutions,     and   people   are building  the WRCC     collaboratively, a    new  resources   for inclusion  in the
                perspectives    because   of   the   variety  of  resources are  collected  and  annotated     Link Manager.
                collaborative setting.               based on different learning preference and stages.
                                                     Building the content of the WRCC is a collaborative
                                                     knowledge building process. The Link Manager is
                                                     directly impacted     by  the  extent  to  which    the
                                                     community actively contributes.
Reflection      Learners  must   reflect on  what    Learners    annotate  other's  contributions,  so   the   Determining   what     new  resources
                they know and don't know.            information about each Web resource continues to          need  to    be      created   requires
                To contribute to the community,      grow based on reflective use and practice.                reflection (what    new  resource   is
                learners  must    articulate   andelaborate their understanding.                               required,  who   is the resource   for,what is the best way to present theresource, etc.).

USE AND IMPACT OF WRCC
The WRCC has been implemented in both work-based learning communities ­ also referred to as communities of practice ­
as well as school-based learning communities (Gordin, Gomez, Pea, & Fishman, 1996). This means that the people who use
the WRCC have a common purpose and share some background, language, or experience (Hildreth, Kimble, & Wright,
1998). For example, the WRCC has been used:
1.  To support communities of practice in two information technology organizations and one training and development
    company (examples not provided due to proprietary content concerns);
2.  To  support    school-based    learning    communities        in both   face-to-face      and   online   programs     at    three  different   higher
    education institutions;
    (1)       To   support    a hybrid     learning  community       of    K-12     teachers    focused   on   technology       integration      issues  in
              Colorado (http://carbon.cudenver.edu/public/wle/wrcc/techfork12/).
In all implementations of the WRCC so far, learning community involvement has been facilitated by me (as a consultant or
faculty member)     or   by   another    faculty   member.    As     prescribed     by  generative     and   intentional    learning       methods,     this
facilitation involves teaching people how to use the tool as well as guiding, coaching, and scaffolding their use until the
community members are using and contributing to the WRCC without reminding or prompting from the facilitator (this
period of facilitation also allows me to collect formative evaluation data to adjust the tool to better support lifelong learning
and professional development needs in learning community settings).

Data Collection
Using pre and post questionnaires and WRCC log-in information, I collected data on three learning communities (one
work-based, one school-based, and one hybrid) I facilitated to use the WRCC over a four month period in the spring of
2001 to answer the following questions:
    -      Can the facilitated use of the WRCC in a learning community setting lead to improved use of the Web ­ without
           the WRCC structure or facilitation ­ for learning and professional development activities?
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 307

     -   Can use of the WRCC for lifelong learning and professional development activities in a learning community
         setting lead to the development  of   some transferable lifelong  learning skills: goal/need determination, action
         planning, learning strategy selection, and resource evaluation?
     -   Can facilitated use of the WRCC in a learning community setting lead to continued use ­ where use means
         continued utilization of the pre-existing resources and the addition of new resources ­ of the WRCC after the
         facilitation is removed?

Results
Work-based learning community: Information Technology Project Team
This community of practice had 11 participants who all actively participated in the WRCC during a software development
project (although the project lasted much longer, my facilitation of their WRCC activities only lasted four months). Nine of
the 11 original members continued to use and contribute to the Discussion Forum and Link Manager of the WRCC after my
facilitation ended (the two members who discontinued had been transferred to a different project). The WRCC experience,
as reported on   a questionnaire, had a positive impact on how    they   used colleagues and   technical texts as resources.
Regarding use of colleagues, for example, the group reported being much more selective and specific about what questions
they took to colleagues, as well as when they turned to colleagues for help; instead of going to a colleague down the hall
immediately, the group was using each other and the WRCC for support first. In addition, when they did go to an external
source for support, the members made an effort to capture the information for inclusion in the WRCC using the Resource
Construction System.

School-based learning community: Web Developers
Fourteen graduate students preparing for careers as Web-based instructional designers participated in a semester-long,
school-based learning community. During the semester, all members participated in building the content of the WRCC.
After the semester was over ­ and my facilitation ended ­ only three members continued to contribute resources to the Link
Manager, although all of them continued to access the WRCC and utilized the existing resources (from both Discussion
Forum and Link Manager). In addition, over 300 peripheral participants (Lave & Wenger, 1991) have accessed the WRCC,
with   many people  adding a  link from  their own  Websites to  it. Questionnaire  results  revealed very little impact on
transferable lifelong learning skills; when using the Web outside of the WRCC structure, students reported more efficient
searching skills based on higher order questions and more specific goal setting, but did not apply these strategies to library
or colleague use.

Hybrid learning community: K-12 Teachers
This community of 19 participants was both a school-based and work-based learning community; although these teachers
were involved in a graduate program at the time, they were actively participating in different communities of practice
focused on technology integration in the classroom. During the four-month period, all members contributed and used all
components of the WRCC. After my facilitation was removed, all but two members continued to access the WRCC, but
only six of the original 19 continued to contribute to it. Additionally, over 200 peripheral participants have accessed the
WRCC's Link Manager (although they did not add to the Link Manager). From the pre and post questions that asked the
community members to describe their use of the Web to support learning and professional development activities, the
WRCC experience did have an impact on their use of the Web, specifically how they searched for resources, how the
evaluated resources, and how they used resources to support their needs. However, only three of the participants indicated a
similar impact on their non-Web resource use; the majority of the group did not indicate making adjustments to how they
used library or human resources.

Summary of Results
Consistently, the WRCC experience seemed to have a positive impact on continued, non-facilitated, non WRCC-structured
use of the Web to support learning and professional development activities. Unfortunately, only the ITO group reported any
improvement on their strategies when using non-Web resources (such as texts and colleagues). It is also discouraging to see
that the school-based and hybrid learning communities no longer added to the Link Manager or Discussion Forum after
facilitation faded. This may be due to discontinued facilitation, the end of the semester/grading period (although students
did not receive a grade for participation), or diminished need to participate in the community. An interesting side effect
seems to be the peripheral participation that happened once each of the two "open to the public" WRCCs were developed
by the Web Developers and the K-12 Teachers, respectively.

DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The development and implementation of the WRCC, and the initial examination of its impact on participants described
above, leads to new directions for research. My immediate focus is on:
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page  308

   1.     The   impact of  facilitation. Facilitation was  included   in the    WRCC   implementations   because    I followed  the
          prescriptions of generative and intentional learning. However, would learning communities spontaneously use
          tools  like the  WRCC    without   initial  facilitation? Can  learning    community    members  provide    referents for
          contribution without someone initially acting as facilitator?
   2.     The   difference between  project-specific   communities    of practice    (which may   have  more of    an emphasis   on
          workplace learning and on-the-job training as opposed to lifelong learning and professional development) and
          learning communities that form because of a common challenge (e.g., the K-12 teachers working together on
          technology integration issues) or interest (e.g., folks who participate in Slashdot.com).
   3.     Ways to improve the transfer of the lifelong learning skills being promoted through facilitated use of the WRCC to
          unfacilitated learning and professional development activities.
   4.     What would the results be if the participants had not been co-located? All three groups had face-to-face time with
          each other. Although the WRCC has been implemented in school-based distance learning communities, I have not
          explored my original research questions with these groups.

CONCLUSION
While creating their own WRCC to support their learning and professional development, learning community members
practice and develop the very skills and strategies needed to engage in lifelong learning and professional development
activities. The WRCC was designed to enable people to develop their own Web-based knowledge bases and learning and
performance support systems. The activity of building a WRCC helps people learn about a domain, construct a knowledge
base to support their future learning and professional development in that domain. Although further research is needed ­
leading to further improvements to the tool and facilitation of the tool's use ­ the WRCC shows promise as a tool to help
learning community members develop the skills, strategies, and structure needed to engage in the type of lifelong learning
and professional development activities that will help them stay current in their professions. [Note: To take a WRCC test
drive or get your own copy, see http://carbon.cudenver.edu/~jdunlap/wrcc/]

REFERENCES
Barrows, H. (1986). A taxonomy of problem-based learning methods. Medical Education, 20, 6, 481-486.
Bednar, A., Cunningham, D., Duffy, T., & Perry, J. (1991). Theory into practice: How do we link? In G. Anglin (Ed.),
          Instructional technology: Past, present, and future (88-101). Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited.
Bereiter, C.,   & Scardamalia,  M.  (1989).   Intentional learning   as  a goal   of instruction. In L. Resnick    (Ed.), Knowing,
          learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (361-392). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bruner, J. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard Educational Review, 31, 1, 21-32.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (1992). The Jasper experiment: An exploration of issues in learning and
          instructional design. Educational Technology Research and Development, 40, 1, 65-80.
Glaser, R. (1991). The maturing of the relationship between the science of learning and cognition and educational practice.
          Learning and Instruction, 1, 129-144.
Gordin, D., Gomez, L., Pea, R., & Fishman, B. (1996). Using the World Wide Web to build learning communities in K-12.
          Journal     of     Computer-mediated        Communication,         2,   3.   Retrieved      May    5,       2001     from
          http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol2/issue3/gordin.html
Hannafin,  M.     (1992).  Emerging technologies,     ISD, and      learning environments:   Critical   perspectives.  Educational
          Technology Research and Development, 40, 1, 49-63.
Hildreth, P., Kimble,    C., & Wright,    P. (1998).  Computer mediated      communications   and    international communities   of
          practice. Proceedings of Ethicomp '98, March 1998, Erasmus University, The Netherlands, 275-286.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University
          Press.
Lebow, D. (1993). Constructivist values for instructional systems design: Five principles toward a new mindset. Educational Technology
          Research and Development, 41, 3, 4-16.
Palincsar, A. (1990). Providing the context for intentional learning. Remedial and Special Education, 11, 6, 36-39.
Palincsar, A. & Klenk, L. (1992). Fostering literacy learning in supportive contexts. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 25, 4,
          211-225.
Pask, G. (1975). Conversation, cognition, and learning. New York: Elsevier.
Resnick, L. (Ed.) (1989). Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
          Erlbaum.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 309

Ridley, D., Schultz, P., Glanz, R., &  Weinstein     C. (1992). Self-regulated learning:    The  interactive influence of
        metacognitive awareness and goal-setting. Journal of Experimental Education, 60, 4, 293-306.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A challenge for the
        design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 1, 37-68.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., McLean, R., Swallow, J., & Woodruff, E. (1989). Computer-supported intentional learning
        environments. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 5, 1, 51-68.
Shank, R., & Jona, M. (1991). Empowering the student: New perspectives on the design of teaching systems. The Journal
        of the Learning Sciences, 1, 1, 7-35.
Von Wright, J. (1992). Reflections on reflection. Learning and Instruction, 2, 59-68.
