Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   310

       The Motivation is the Message: Comparing CSCL in
                                             Different Settings
                                   R. T. Jim Eales, Tony Hall, Liam J. Bannon
                                                 Interaction Design Centre,
                                       University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.
                                                      jim.eales@ul.ie
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we attempt to draw comparisons between our research experiences of Computer Supported Collaborative
Learning in the workplace, in schools and in universities. We present an outline description of our activities in each setting.
As a possible contribution to foundational theory in CSCL, we focus on the crucial but complex issue of learner motivation.
We argue that the dominant issues of motivation may vary from setting to setting but that CSCL can play an important role
in engaging learner motivation in all settings. In particular, we consider the inauthenticity of most university education and
consider how this might be addressed by CSCL.

Keywords
Learner motivation, workplace learning, school education, university education, situated learning, deschooling, authentic
learning.

INTRODUCTION
This paper arose out of the realisation by the first author that he had been involved, in one way or another, with Computer
Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) in a number of very different settings or domains. We reasoned that on the basis
of our CSCL experiences in the workplace, K-12 schools and universities, it must surely be possible to draw some valuable
general conclusions     about the foundations of  CSCL.   Although we   would  confidently  describe all our    experiences as
relating to CSCL, we also realise that because of variations in factors other than setting, it could be said that we are
attempting to compare chalk with cheese (or as the Americans say, apples with oranges). The experiences occurred in three
different countries: Australia, USA and England, (and we are now working on CSCL research in Ireland). All the countries
are, however, predominantly     English  speaking, and  national location seems to  have  been  one  of  the least significant
variables. The predominant technology also varied between the different research settings. In the K-12 schools, our main
focus was on synchronous communication using videoconferencing, whereas in the university and workplace our focus was
predominantly on asynchronous communication. Of perhaps most significance were variations in the "formality" of the
learning perspective. In the workplace, we were exploring clearly informal learning strategies amongst workers, whereas at
university level and in the K-12 schools, our perspective was more formal. The order or sequence of the experiences, it
seems,  has also    had a marked   influence  on  our overall conclusions about the   value and priorities   of CSCL.  If   the
experiences had occurred in a different sequence our final impressions would perhaps have been very different.
This paper is not simply a series of personal CSCL recollections. We have attempted to find some common theme running
through the paper connecting all the experiences. Collaboration, of course, was a common factor, but that is a defining
characteristic of the field. The central theme that emerged from our reconsideration of CSCL in the different settings was
the crucial issue of learner motivation. At first, it was not easy to recognise this common factor because the issues related to
motivation where markedly different in the various environments. But slowly we began to realise that many of the principal
conclusions we had previously drawn from our research, such as ownership, interest and authenticity, were all facets of
learner motivation. We have long believed that motivation, while often overlooked, is perhaps the single most important
factor in learning.
In this paper, although we make frequent reference to our practical experiences (including interview extracts from the
participants), we focus primarily on the more theoretical issues relating to the value of CSCL in learning and education;
and, of course, the crucial importance of motivation. We believe this reflects the foundational spirit of the conference. We
do, however, apologise for not discussing in more depth the fine details of CSCL-based educational activities, but we can't
help but feel this is like arranging deck chairs on the Titanic. Perhaps the ship of education is not about to sink but it does
seem to be going around in circles. We argue for a radical agenda in the application of CSCL. We also apologise for
concentrating on learning and educational practices (and particularly undergraduate education) rather than technological
design issues. As pointed out by Bannon (1995), in CSCL there is a tendency to focus too much on the features of the
technology, and not on the learning activities. In our practical CSCL experiments we have only very occasionally come up
against obvious technical limitations.
We need to say something briefly about the language used in this paper. It does seem that educational terms exhibit a higher
than average  variation   between  the different versions of English. When  we  refer to K-12 schools   (kindergarten to  12th
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page  311

grade) we   will use  the term  K-12   school. When    we  are referring    to higher education   we    will generally use  the term
university. However, we use the terms students, teaching and schooling generically to refer to all formal education. A
module is an individual class at university.
After  a  brief discussion   of our   most significant   theoretical educational     influences we  describe     our CSCL   research
experiences in the order in which they occurred. We begin by considering collaborative learning in the workplace; we
follow with an outline of our K-12 school CSCL experiences and end the section with a description of our use of CSCL at
university level. We attempt to draw some general conclusions from each of the experiences, in particular, relating to the
theme of motivation. We then consider the issue of the inauthenticity of university education in more detail, and how CSCL
can perhaps challenge this inauthenticity.

THEORETICAL INFLUENCES
Paul Goodman (1971) described schooling as a "mass superstition" which nobody opposes and for which nobody proposes
alternatives. Our main theoretical influences are situated learning (Lave and Wenger, 1991, see also Brown et al, 1989, and
Wenger, 1998) and deschooling (Illich, 1973, see also Reimer, 1971). Although at first these two theories may appear to
have little in common, we believe, they both offer radical challenges to traditional ideas on learning and education. In
addition, all theories based on social models of learning are influenced to some extent by the socio-cognitive theories of
Vygotsky (1978).
Lave and Wenger (1991) explain situated learning as "...learners inevitably participate in communities of practitioners and
that the mastery of knowledge and skill requires newcomers to move toward full participation in the sociocultural practices
of a community" (p. 29). They describe the process by which newcomers become part of a community of practice as
legitimate peripheral participation (LPP). They suggest that a "person's intentions to learn are engaged and the meaning of
learning is configured through the process of becoming a full participant in a sociocultural practice. This social process
includes, indeed it subsumes, the learning of knowledgeable skills'' (p. 29). It should be noted that Lave and Wenger do not
intend LPP to be an educational form or a pedagogical strategy ­ "it is an analytical viewpoint on learning, a way of
understanding learning'' (p. 40). They argue that learning through LPP takes place whatever the educational setting or even
if there is no explicit educational setting at all. Consequently we cannot speak about situated learning and non-situated
learning, all learning and all activity is situated. Interestingly, they note that in the examples they use to illustrate the
concept of LPP there is very little observable teaching; the emphasis is on learning, not teaching, and often the most
important and direct contributors to that learning are the peers of the participant.
In situated learning, and    particularly in studies of  communities     of practice, motivation   is   rarely explicitly mentioned.
Learner motivation is integral to the culture and expectations of the community and is expressed in terms of changes in
social participation and cultural identity. However, it should be remembered that an important act of commitment takes
place when the newcomer enters the community of practice and commits to eventually becoming a full participant.
From a situated learning perspective, we can see that in formal education the principal thing learned is schooling itself. It is
the game itself that gets into the blood. Perhaps the most inauthentic aspect of formal education is the practice of grading.
Illich (1973) suggests that "the institutionalized values school instils are quantified ones. School initiates young people into
a world where everything can be measured, including their imaginations, and, indeed, man himself" (p. 45). Illich proposed
Learning Webs as an alternative to schools. He outlined the kinds of resources required if one considered not what people
ought to learn, but instead what kinds of things and people learners might need to be in contact with. He identified four
kinds  of learning resources:   Things    (educational objects), Models     (skilled people),   Peers (other   learners), and Elders
(educators-at-large). Illich also   suggested  that technology   could   be harnessed   to provide    a reference  service  for these
resources.
Illich warned that education tends to become unworldly and the world becomes non-educational. For him, and for us,
deschooling  society  means     far more  than just  breaking  out   of schools;  it means  overcoming       the schooling mentality
throughout the whole of society. We cannot emphasize this point too much. Our experiences have shown that it is possible
to escape the physical classroom only to find that you have taken the mentality of schooling with you.

CSCL EXPERIENCES
Workplace
We  carried out   "ethnographic"    investigations  into the informal    learning strategies  used by    administrative   workers to
develop their computer-related skills (see Eales, 1994, 1995, in press). The setting was the administrative sector of the
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. The University, at the time, employed some 5,000 staff, had 25,000 students
and an annual budget of over AUS$330 million. The administrative section of the university was divided into a number of
departments using a wide range of software on several different hardware platforms. Our ultimate aim was to use our
findings to inform the design of a computer-based collaborative support system. An important part of our research was to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 312

find an acceptable technical medium that allowed users to easily create or capture representations of their practice. To this
end, we performed a number of experiments using recorded demonstrations as a means of sharing expertise between users.
Our investigations indicated that formal training played only a small part in workers' computer-related skill development
but that informal collaborative learning was ubiquitous and important.
  Beverley: ... there are people who have got more experience than others. But we all know each other and are helpful to
  each other. People will lend a hand. Well I don't know whether the boss would appreciate it going outside of the room
  but we do, you're not going to turn anybody down if they need any help. I don't anyway.
Owned dilemmas related to computer-based skills were often referred to and appeared to represent important windows for
learning, but although "communities of assistance" existed, expertise was often in short supply. Two of the departments had
experimented with the appointment of semi-formal support persons in an attempt to supplement informal expertise. These
support persons were expected to assist with the development of computer skills within a department. It was evident from
our research, that any formalization of the support person role may well lead to a change in the fundamental relationship
between the people with problems and the person providing support, often accompanied by a certain amount of tension.
Narelle, a semi-formal support person, articulates the development of this dependency relationship.
  Narelle: It's easier to run in and say "Narelle, is there a problem with this?" or "Narelle, do you know something about
  this?" than it is to try and do some trouble-shooting of your own.
A sense of ownership of the problem or dilemma appears to be a vital motivating force in learning. When support is
completely informal, the problem is owned by the learner and any assistance from other workers is based on mutual
support. When the support role is formalized users may be encouraged to take a more passive attitude to their learning,
becoming   more  dependent on the support person.  Our   research focused   on how  the levels of   mastery or    expertise in
communities of assistance could be increased and how the problems could be resolved collectively without diminishing the
all-important motivating sense of ownership?
In this particular workplace, there appeared to be a real need for some kind of technical augmentation to the existing
collaborative support network. Ownership of the (learning) problems was manifest, collaborative relationships with other
workers (learners) were strong, but learners appeared to be isolated from more expert practice. The expertise the workers
had, they shared, but they needed ways to extend or develop their practice that did not violate the subtle rules of informal
commitment and assistance. We believed that some kind of CSCL system, rather than individualised content delivery (e-
learning), could make a positive  contribution to the   development    of more expert practice amongst   these    workers.  In
summary, while commitment and motivation to learn were evident in this workplace, demonstrated by a clear collective
ownership of skill-related problems, this motivation was nevertheless extremely fragile and could easily be lost.

K-12 Schools
The context for our investigation into K-12 school-based collaborative learning was a project group from Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, USA and the Montgomery County Public Schools (Virginia) supported by a major award from the U. S.
National Science Foundation (see Eales & Byrd, 1997, Eales et al., 1999). The Learning in Networked Communities
(LiNC) project sought to utilise the network infrastructure brought to the County by the Blacksburg Electronic Village
(BEV) (Carroll & Rosson, 1996). Our particular interest was the support of web-based collaborative learning between the
schools and between schools and the university. The project members included four science teachers from four different
schools, two  high schools  and  two middle    schools. Two  of   the  schools are in  the Town     of Blacksburg   and     are
approximately 12 miles (19 km) away from the other two schools in a rural part of the county.
During our time on this project, the principal interest was experimenting with web-based desktop videoconferencing (DVC)
between the schools and between the schools and mentors at the university. The videoconferencing provided a small
window to the outside world that never failed to interest the students. Perhaps the most significant educational issue to
emerge from our introduction of videoconferencing into the classroom was that many of the most active and competent
system users were what might be termed "average" students. The particular demands of the videoconferencing medium
appeared to empower and motivate a set of previously relatively disadvantaged students. The experienced teachers in the
project first highlighted this characteristic of DVC. For example, one middle school student when asked which method of
communication he preferred replied:
         Josh: The video [DVC], because you actually get a chance to see and talk to the
         person rather than spending a lot of time typing.
Videoconferencing introduces a new form of communication into the classroom that requires new skills. Many of those that
demonstrated competency in this area were students who normally do not get the opportunity to excel in the classroom.
Student motivation that developed during videoconferencing appeared to be transferred to areas where literacy skills are
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page   313

more central. For example, students coordinated videoconferencing sessions via e-mail messages and presented their final
project reports in the form of web pages.
It seemed that students were motivated by the "reality" of videoconferencing with the outside world. Willis' (1980) classic
ethnographic study of schooling in an English industrial town has some very interesting perspectives on the relationship
between schooling and reality. Willis contrasts the motivations of the anti-school group, "the lads", with the more pro-
school group, "the ear `oles". One of the most interesting aspects of this study is that he follows the boys beyond the school
into the workplace. Willis demonstrates that the counter-school culture of "the lads" has many similarities with the culture
of the factory floor. If we take a perspective that equates the culture of the workplace with reality, it is possible to interpret
the lads' rejection of school as a rejection of the inauthenticity of schooling. The "ear `oles", on the other hand, are
prepared to accept, at least partially, the alternative reality of the school. The lads left school as early as possible. The
"ultra-realists" seem  to   be  the first out the   door of the   school. CSCL,   in  its  ability to afford   sustained collaborative
interaction with "real" people and situations outside the classroom, may be able to offer a valuable educational motivating
force. This  may   have   a  specific  positive  influence  on  those  students  who  typically    perform  badly   within the   current
prevailing educational environment.

University
The context for our university-level CSCL "experiments" was a third year undergraduate module in Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW) in the department of Computer Science and Information Systems at the University of Luton,
England (see Eales, 2001). This module ran in 1999 and in 2000 and had 35 students on each occasion. The field of CSCW
is concerned with the study of group activities and the design of computer-based technologies to support cooperative work
(sometimes referred to as groupware). A particular problem (especially at undergraduate level) in CSCW education is that
most   students  have  only    limited previous     experience  of   computer-mediated     group   activities. An   important  part  of
understanding    CSCW     is appreciating   the  subtleties of  group  activities and   group  dynamics     mediated   by  technology.
Without this personal experience there is a danger that the learning will be overly theoretical and detached from the learner
(Dewey, 1966). Our solution, which seemed appropriate, was to use a CSCW system to provide a hopefully authentic
CSCW experience to underpin the teaching of CSCW theory. The software used was the Basic Support for Cooperative
Work    (BSCW)     system    (Bentley   et  al.,  1997)  developed     at the   German     National   IT   Research    Center  (GMD)
(http://bscw.gmd.de/). This system is essentially an asynchronous shared workspace system. Access to a group workspace
requires only a standard web browser. The system supports a variety of information-sharing activities including structured
discussions, uploading and downloading of documents and links to websites. The BSCW system was originally created as
primarily a business tool but is being increasingly used for educational purposes (Appelt and Mambrey 1999). For us the
system had a number of distinct advantages. It was easy to set up (we used the servers in Germany), it offered web-based
access, was content-free, flexible and reasonably easy to use, in effect, an educational technology test bed.
The use and development of the shared workspace became an integral part of the learning experience for this module.
Having taken the decision to use the system it then seemed appropriate to seek to use it to investigate novel ways of
supporting learning. An important part of our investigation was the involvement of an authentic domain "expert". The
expert  was  importantly    not an  academic    but a  practising  researcher in  CSCW,     based  at a  major  government    research
establishment in Australia.
The use of a shared workspace system as the basis for a learning environment obviously supports collaborative learning.
Luton students typically represent an extreme range of abilities and this range was reflected in this particular module.
Often, in instructor-led educational settings, students are unaware of the contributions from other students. The technology-
facilitated group workspace made the contributions, views, and particularly the reflections, of all students more visible to
the entire group,  hopefully    improving   overall   standards   of scholarship  and   intellectual  reasoning.   Such  a system   can
provide a level of participation and visibility that would be difficult to facilitate in a physical classroom.
In  previous modules,   where    participation   in a shared  workspace    had  been  voluntary,   student  use    had been somewhat
limited. We  decided   from     the outset that   the extrinsic motivation   of  25%    of the final  grade    for participation in the
workspace was a necessary evil. Ideally we would hope that student reaction would be of this form:
         Enda: Finally I think I would have contributed whether or not there was a grade involved, simply because it has
         been fun to use a new system like this!!
However the more common student feedback was:
    Lisa: There is no way I would have participated in BSCW if there was no grade attached to it. I find it takes too long
    wading through all the various folders and discussions that are going on, by the time I finish doing that I don't feel like
    replying to anything. The sole reason for my participation is the GRADE.
We announced at the beginning of the course that there would be a grade for participation in the workspace and then rather
naively  hoped   that the students    would   put the  matter  to  the backs  of  their minds  and    just get on   with participating.
However, the issue of what constituted the right kind of participation was a recurring topic of discussion. Most students
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page 314

adopted the "sensible" strategy of mainly taking part in lecturer-initiated discussions or discussions that appeared to be
important to the lecturer, (a kind of cyber-stalking). In this way, their contributions were sure to be noticed. These strategies
clearly  worked against   many   of the  objectives of  collaborative  learning. For example,  some     students  tried to initiate
discussions of their own but other students did not respond. Student behaviour at times resembled pigeons pecking for seed
in a Skinner box (a device for developing and measuring behaviouristic learning).
We consider access to the "authentic" to be a valuable resource. Our virtual expert had a significant influence on the
activities and learning in the module. However, we would like to have magnified her influence. One of the main problems
seemed to be that she had to come to terms with our university culture. In many ways the shared workspace became an
extension of the module and of the university; a place where the standard "rules of schooling" applied. It seems we had
tried to escape from schooling and to create a more authentic environment only to find that schooling had followed us. This
student focus on getting a good grade is at the heart of what we term inauthentic learning. We intend to explore the issue of
authenticity in more depth, and its relationship to CSCL, later in this paper.

MOTIVATION
What general conclusions, based on our experiences, can we make about motivation and CSCL? As we mentioned earlier,
in trying to make generalisations across our experiences, to some extent, we are not comparing like with like. There were a
number of significant variations other than the domain of interaction. However, rather than a disadvantage, these changes
may have allowed us to experience a wider cross section of motivational factors.
We do not fully understand the complete geography of motivation, but we can make a number of tentative observations. We
want to   make  a   distinction  between   authentic  and   inauthentic  motivation.  Authenticity   is a  particularly  complex
philosophical concept, but in very simple terms, authentic motivation is related to a focus on the development of robust,
long-term knowledge, whereas, inauthentic motivation is focused on assessment and the tactics of schooling, i.e., getting a
good grade. Ownership of the learning problem appears to be a particularly powerful form of motivation. However, perhaps
because it is so compelling, so demanding, this type of motivation is also very fragile. In the workplace, learners seemed
only too ready to surrender their ownership in return for a reduction in the anxiety related to their skill development.
Importantly, communities of practice appear to offer a model where commitment to the community retains ownership but
spreads the burden of the learning problem across the whole community. Rather than surrendering ownership to a group of
professional trainers, ownership of problems and the need to develop appropriate solutions is integrated into the collective
objectives of the whole community. We feel that CSCL appears to offer opportunities to create technically augmented
communities of practice that spread the burden of learning problems while retaining the all important ownership of those
problems. For example, Scardamalia and Bereiter (1996) present the idea of knowledge building in communities as a way
of facilitating superior education (or authentic learning) in schools.
Inauthentic motivation, on the other hand, often appears to represent a surrendering of ownership, of what is to be learned,
in return for some extrinsic reward like a qualification. It also often allows the learner to adopt a more passive role. In its
extreme form, "learners" have no interest in what they are learning, only in increasing their rewards and/or decreasing their
efforts. We  will argue   later in the  paper that this is inauthentic  because  the content  and the   rewards   are misaligned.
Knowledge    within  this kind  of  "learning" environment   tends  to  only have  short-term exchange     value.  In educational
institutions, CSCL may offer opportunities to challenge deeply ingrained inauthentic motivation by bringing students into
contact with authentic situations and problems from outside these environments. In particular, the ability of CSCL to
introduce an element of "reality" into schools may engage those underachieving students who have previously largely
rejected the inauthenticity of formal education.

AUTHENTIC LEARNING
From our current position in higher education, we find it hard to interpret our complete CSCL experience as anything other
than "a journey away from reality and authenticity". In the workplace, at the informal level, workers had real problems that
necessitated learning. In particular, they needed to connect with expertise and manage the time and effort associated with
learning, but there  was  also  a  real sense  of collective ownership   of  the problems. That   is not   to say, however,   that
inauthenticity does not exist in the workplace at other levels. In the classroom environment of the K-12 school, there was
genuine interest in the glimpses of reality from beyond the classroom. In the university, although technology afforded many
valuable "educational" experiences, undergraduates eschewed the authentic, remaining focused on the game of schooling or
"getting a degree". In this section, we want to discuss in more detail the inauthenticity of most university learning and how
this can perhaps be addressed by CSCL-based "virtual deschooling".
For many years, there has been debate about the fundamental basis of university education. One side has championed
various professional or vocational skills specific to the age, whereas the other has advocated more theoretical general-
purpose skills as being the best preparation for life after university. Accusations such as "dumbing-down" are levelled at
one side and "living in ivory towers" levelled at the other. One thing, however, that unites both camps is their use of
success  in the real world   as  a  yardstick  to justify their theories and  practices. This appeal    to real  world  values or
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  315

authenticity is an implicit aspect of all theories of education and has been a consistent ingredient in calls for educational
reform. After all, who would propose a theory of education that prepared students only for a life in educational institutions?
Brown, Collins and Duguid (1989) offer the following definition of authenticity: "The activities of a domain are framed by
its culture. Their meaning and purpose are socially constructed through negotiations among present and past members.
Activities thus cohere in a way that is, in theory, if not always in practice, accessible to members who move within the
social framework. These coherent, meaningful, and purposeful activities are authentic, according to the definition of the
term we use here. Authentic activities then, are most simply defined as the ordinary practices of the culture" (p. 34).
Koschmann   et   al. (1996) include the principle of authenticity   as one  of their six  principles of effective learning and
instruction. They summarise this principle as "Learning is sensitive to perspective, goals, and context, that is, the learner's
orientation, goals and experiences in the learning process determine the nature and usability of what is learned; instruction,
therefore, should provide for engagement in the types of activities that are required and valued in the real world" (p. 91).
But just what are the types of activities that are required and valued in the real world? Resnick (1987) suggests that there
are four broad characteristics of mental activity used outside of school that stand in marked contrast to mental activities
developed in schools:
1.  Individual cognition in school versus shared cognition outside school.
2.  Pure mentation in school versus tool manipulation outside school.
3.  Symbol manipulation in school versus contextualized reasoning outside school.
4.  Generalized learning in school versus situation-specific competencies outside school.
Being aware of the value of authentic learning and facilitating authentic learning, are, of course, two different things. In
particular, it seems difficult to understand what is currently going on in universities. University lecturers often seem to be
motivated most by their own interests and what they believe is the inherent value of "their" subject. Nothing brings them
back to "reality" quicker than a question from a student such as "will this be in the exam" or "are your lecture notes on your
website?" There seems to be a paradox here. The education system constantly selects on the student's grades, and yet we
are appalled by the "Frankenstein's monster" that our selection process creates. Of course, the more sophisticated students
are adept at hiding their interest in the game of schooling.
A critical description of the education system by Jean Lave (1990) may help us to at least tease apart the most obvious
competing versions of reality/authenticity. She argues "the problem is that any curriculum intended to be a specification of
practice, rather than an arrangement of opportunities for practice (for fashioning and resolving ownable dilemmas) is bound
to result in the teaching of a misanalysis of practice (...) and the learning of still another" (p. 324). From this we can identify
three curricula:
    ·    Curriculum 1 - The curriculum as an arrangement of opportunities for practice (for fashioning and resolving
         ownable dilemmas)
    ·    Curriculum 2 - The curriculum as a taught specification of practice
    ·    Curriculum 3 ­ The curriculum as a learned specification of practice.
To this list, we should add perhaps the most dominant curriculum (or possibly it is a meta curriculum). What Illich (1973)
describes as the "hidden curriculum of schooling" ­ the curriculum as an arrangement of dilemmas related to performance.
University students rightly understand that university is a community of practice where the "real" practice is getting a good
grade and ultimately getting a degree, the rest is just window dressing. The owned dilemmas are dilemmas of performance
not of learning or understanding. Ironically, the more inauthentic university education appears to be the more it supports the
claims of situated learning. In that, in the university situation, most students quite successfully learn the tacit knowledge
that will usually ensure their survival in that particular environment. What makes this practice inauthentic, however, is that
it has little value outside of a university. We believe university education is particularly inauthentic because of the "front
loading" of education.   Most  students go straight  from    K-12  school  to university. By the time     they reach university
graduation  they  have  been  at school continuously  for    over fifteen years. No  wonder  then    that in terms of intrinsic
motivation most students are "running on empty", just trying to keep going long enough to finally get a degree.

SUPPORTING AUTHENTIC LEARNING
We agree with Fischer and Scarff (1998) that we need to go beyond the "gift-wrapping" approach, where new technology is
merely wrapped around old frameworks for education. Authentic learning clearly needs to be collaborative, but CSCL also
appears to offer the opportunity to virtually deschool education by bridging educational and outside worlds. Indeed, in the
virtual, the issue of what is inside and what is outside becomes problematic. This means that CSCL systems, with their
ability to support interaction with diverse remote communities are of value to all students and not just those involved in
distance education.
In 1997 (Eales & Byrd, 1997), we outlined a preliminary three-level model of authentic learning. Our three levels were:
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page   316

   1.     Engagement with information
   2.     Engagement with simulation
   3.     Engagement with authenticity
We still stand by our three-level model, however, we would define the levels a little differently (especially avoiding the
self-referential third level description):
   1.     Engagement with authentic data and information
   2.     Engagement with authentic procedures and skills (usually involving simulation)
   3.     Engagement with authentic contexts
Our original aim in proposing this model was to distinguish the third level from the other areas claiming to be authentic
learning. An    important characteristic   of  the first two  levels is that they  imply   a certain degree   of pre-authentication
(Petraglia, J., 1997, Barab   et al., 2000).   They   depend   to a  large  extent on an   educator-derived   definition of  what is
authentic, whereas third level authenticity is an emergent property of the interaction. In other words, attempts by educators
to teach what is authentic rather than to facilitate student engagement with the authentic are unlikely to lead to authentic
learning.
As outlined  earlier, we  have   experimented      with  what  we term  Authentic    Learning Environments    (ALE's),   networked
technical systems allied to appropriate authentic learning activities. Our aim was to bring together university students and
outside domain    experts in a   virtual environment,    unfortunately  the  mentality  of schooling  is not  that   easily defeated.
Although the environment provided a number of valuable educational experiences, the all-powerful collective motivation of
getting a good grade ensured that the virtual space became an extension of the university, where university rules of reality
held sway.
Currently, we are experimenting with connecting university students to well-established virtual communities with strong
existing authentic motivations, what Brown and Duguid (2000) describe as networks of practice. Although we are generally
pessimistic, we are interested in exploring whether virtual interaction can blur the distinction between inside and outside of
the university and challenge the participant's identities as students (or degree-getters). There are obviously limits to the
level of authentic engagement possible in undergraduate education. The inauthentic motivation of undergraduates is strong
and we only have the opportunity to mount a small challenge (perhaps a single university module) to this prevailing
perspective; what  Carl   Rogers   (1969)     termed "institutional press". Nevertheless,  we   believe  CSCL    at  university level
should be used to explore the limits of inauthenticity. An alternative role for CSCL systems as hi-tech skinner boxes will
only serve to reinforce existing inauthentic practices.

CONCLUSIONS
We  have    suggested that motivation      is an essential but  often   overlooked   ingredient in successful  learning.    We  have
attempted to illustrate this with descriptions and discussion of our CSCL research experiences. CSCL by virtue of its
defining characteristics of technically augmented collaborative learning appears to be uniquely suited to address both the
issue of extending informal communities of practice and challenging inauthentic learning in educational institutions. To
address these key issues, however, we need to continue to pursue a radical educational agenda in CSCL.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Jim Welsh, Laura Byrd, Dennis Neale, Jack Carroll and Geraldine Fitzpatrick for their assistance in
our CSCL research.

REFERENCES
Appelt, W. and Mambrey, P. (1999) Experiences with the BSCW shared workspace system as the backbone of a virtual
          learning environment for students. In the proc. of ED-MEDIA '99, Seattle, USA.
Bannon,   L. J. (1995)   Issues in computer      supported collaborative   learning. In O'Malley,  C.   (ed.) Computer   Supported
          Collaborative Learning. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 267-281.
Barab,  S.  A.,  Squire,  K. D.  and   Dueber,     W.   (2000) A    Co-Evolutionary   Model   for  Supporting    the Emergence    of
          Authenticity. Educational Technology Research & Development, 48,2,37-62.
Bentley, R., Appelt, W., Busbach, U., Hinrichs, E., Kerr, D., Sikkel, S., Trevor, J. and Woetzel, G. (1997). Basic support
          for cooperative work on the World Wide Web. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 46,6,827-846.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., and Duguid, P. (1989) Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher,
          18,1,32-42.
Brown, J. S. and Duguid, P. (2000) The Social Life of Information. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                  page         317

Carroll, J. M., and Rosson, M. B. (1996) Developing the Blacksburg Electronic Village. Communications of the ACM,
       39,12,69-74.
Dewey, J. (1966) Democracy and Education. Free Press, New York, NY, (First published 1916).
Eales, R. T. J. and Welsh, J. (1994) Learnability through working together. In the proceedings of OZCHI'94, (Melbourne,
       Australia, 28th Nov - 2nd Dec 1994), pp. 27-32.
Eales, R. T. J. and Welsh, J. (1995) Design for Collaborative Learnability. In the proceedings of CSCL '95, (Indiana
       University, Bloomington, IN), pp. 99-106.
Eales, R. T. J. and Byrd, L. M. (1997) Virtually Deschooling Society: Authentic collaborative learning via the Internet. In
       the proceedings of WebNet 97 (World conference of the WWW, Internet & Intranet), Toronto, Canada, November
       1997.
Eales, R. T. J., Neale, D. C. and Carroll, J. M. (1999) Desktop Videoconferencing as a Basis for Computer Supported
       Collaborative Learning  in K-12 Classrooms.     In the proceedings of ED-Media     1999 (World Conference       on
       Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications), Seattle, USA, June 1999.
Eales, R. T. J. (2001) Brewing ALE's: Creating Authentic Learning Environments. In the proceedings of WebNet 2001
       (World conference of the WWW and Internet), Orlando, USA, October 2001.
Eales, R. T. J. (In press) Supporting Informal Communities of Practice within Organizations. In Ackerman, M., Pipek, V.
       and Wulf , V. (eds). Beyond Knowledge Management: Sharing Expertise. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fischer, G. and Scharff, E. (1998) Learning Technologies in Support of Self-Directed Learning. Journal of Interactive
       Media in Education, 98,4. [www-jime.open.ac.uk/98/4]
Goodman, P. (1971) Compulsory Miseducation. Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK.
Illich, I. (1973) Deschooling Society. Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK.
Koschmann, T., Kelson, A. C., Feltovich, P. J. and Barrows, H. S. (1996) Computer-Supported Problem-Based Learning: A
       principled approach to the use of computers in collaborative learning. In Koschmann, T. (ed.) CSCL: Theory and
       practice of an emerging paradigm. Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 83-124.
Lave, J. (1990) The Culture of Acquisition and the Practice of Understanding. In Stigler, J. W., Shweder, R. A. and
       Herdt,G. (eds.) Cultural Psychology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 309-328.
Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
       University Press.
Petraglia, J. (1997) Reality by Design: The rhetoric and technology of authenticity in education. Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Reimer, E. (1971) School is Dead, Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK.
Resnick, L. B. (1987) Learning in School and Out. Educational Researcher, 16,9,13-20.
Rogers, C. R. (1969) Freedom to Learn. Merrill, Columbus, OH.
Scardamalia, M. and Bereiter, C. (1996) Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities. In Koschmann, T. (ed.)
       CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 249-268.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press,
       Cambridge, MA.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
       UK.
   Willis, P. E. (1980) Learning to Labour: How working class kids get working class jobs. Gower, Farnborough, UK.
