Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page   318

     From Paralyzing Myths to Expansive Action: Building
         Computer-Supported Knowledge Work into the
                                       Curriculum from Below
                                                     Yrjö Engeström
                   University of California, San Diego and University of Helsinki, Finland
                                                     Yrjo.Engestrom@helsinki.fi
                                                    Ritva Engeström
                                            University of Helsinki, Finland
                                                     Ritva.Engestrom@helsinki.fi
                                                      Arja Suntio
                                            University of Helsinki, Finland
                                                       Arja.Suntio@helsinki.fi

ABSTRACT
Technology-driven CSCL solutions are often difficult to integrate into the instructional practices of a school community.
We report on an intervention study in a middle school where the entire teaching staff engaged in a year-long effort to
change  their instructional practices  by   means of  incorporating information  and  communication    technologies   in pilot
curriculum units. The teachers set out to make pedagogical changes along two dimensions, from procedure-oriented drill to
problem- and principle-oriented knowledge production, and from encapsulated classroom work to networked learning in
partnerships  between  the  school and  organizations outside. They  employed   conceptual  models  to   anchor their change
efforts `upward'  in a long-term   general  vision. They also   anchored  their change  efforts `downward',  in  videotaped
examples of classroom practice. Technical tools were subordinate to a pedagogical object. For the pedagogical object to
gain momentum and become a true motive for the teachers, they needed to take expansive actions that moved them from
myth-driven to object-driven discourse. These expansive actions were actions of redefining the students as capable, and
consequently redefining a new model of teaching as possible.

Keywords
Computer-supported knowledge work, school change, expansive learning

INTRODUCTION
In the school year 2000/2001, we conducted a longitudinal intervention study at the Jakomäki middle school in Helsinki,
Finland. The school is located in a socio-economically disadvantaged neighborhood of the city, with some 30% of the
students coming from recent immigrant and refugee families. The school has 30 full-time teachers, all of whom participate
in the intervention. The intervention, called Knowledge Work Laboratory, was a continuation and extension of a Change
Laboratory intervention we conducted in the school in 1998/99 (Engeström, Engeström & Suntio, in press).
A central outcome of the intervention work in 1998/99 was a modeling of the inner contradictions of the teachers' activity
system (Figure 1).
"...the inner contradictions   of  the work  of Jakomäki  teachers   appeared   only in latent  forms, as  dilemmas   within
components of the activity system, not yet as aggravated contradictions between components causing constant manifest
troubles or 'double bind' situations in everyday practice. The two lightning-shaped arrows in Figure 1 represent the latent
contradictions we found salient in the teachers' activity system. The first one (within the object) was manifested in the
teachers' repeated talk about students as apathetic -- and in occasional utterances where they would contradict their very
assessment. The second latent contradiction (within the instruments) was manifested in the teachers' repeated talk about the
need to  control the students' conduct   -- and in  occasional statements suggesting  that the  students should  be trusted."
(Engeström, Engeström & Suntio, in press)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page     319

                                          INSTRUMENTS:
                                          Control vs. trust

                  SUBJECT:                                                  OBJECT:
                  Teacher                                                   Student as apathetic    vs.
                                                                            student as energetic

          RULES:                             COMMUNITY:                  DIVISION OF LABOUR:
          Schedules and                      School                      School subjects and
          timetables                                                     grade levels

Figure 1. Inner contradictions of the teachers' activity system at Jakomäki middle school (Engeström, Engeström & Suntio,
in press)
In the first intervention, we found that the teachers cherished a stubborn collective myth of their students as `apathetic'
beings who could not be trusted. What surprised us was that in spite of this paralyzing myth and the `underdeveloped' state
of the inner contradictions of their activity system, the teachers went on and created potentially expansive and quite durable
changes in their work practices.
"In similar  intervention studies we  have  conducted   in  other organizations (e.g.,  Engeström,  1999), the practitioners'
involvement  in serious   and sustained change  efforts has typically been  explained   by  aggravated  contradictions in  the
activity system. Such aggravated contradictions generate disturbances and double bind situations in everyday work, making
it evident that something must be done.
In Jakomäki, this explanation works poorly. As we have already indicated, the teachers did not experience the kind of
urgent pressure or pending crisis that would make expansive transformation a deeply felt necessity. Yet the teachers were
very willing to design and try out new forms of practice. (...) Instead of dwelling on problems and their causes, they
formulated calls for change. This is in stark contrast to our experiences in many similar projects, where the practitioners
have interpreted the absence of crisis as a license to protect the status quo." (Engeström, Engeström & Suntio, in press)
Furthermore, we found that in Jakomäki the teachers had an unusually rich and strong relationship to their students' lives ­
that is, to the dynamics of their object. The `staring back' of students' reality (Hargreaves, 1997, p. 6) is of course common
to any school located in a tough neighborhood. In Jakomäki, the teachers seem unusually sensitive to and energized by this
`staring back' ­ paradoxically, in spite of their cherished myth of student apathy. As we concluded in an analysis of the first
intervention (Engeström,   Engeström    & Suntio, in press): "Students   may  be   talked  about in negative,  nostalgic  and
frustrated terms. But they are not deleted or covered up with the help of fashionable jargon."
Our hypothesis was that the teachers' ability to `surpass themselves' (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993) demonstrated in
1998/98 was not an accidental phenomenon but an historically accumulated property of their activity system. Thus, in the
intervention of 2000/01 we first of all expected to witness again such a movement from paralyzing myths to expansive
action. We secondly assumed that this movement would be mediated by the teachers' turn to the students, that is, by
anticipatory and actual involvement in students' expectations, reactions and lifeworlds.
In  the intervention of 2000/01,  the teachers specifically wanted   to integrate tools  of information and communication
technology into their instruction. That is why the intervention was called Knowledge Work Laboratory. They wanted to do
this as a step toward new pedagogical practices, not merely because it is fashionable to use computers in teaching. The
teachers were very suspicious of technology-driven packages and models of instruction. We might add that our research
group also has no particular interest to promote information and communication technologies, and certainly no preferred
model or package that we would propagate. Thus, in groups of two to four members, the teachers selected pilot topics,
curriculum units in which they applied information and communication technology to facilitate pedagogical change from
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 320

below. Nine pilot units were formed, and 27 out of the 30 teachers were involved in their design and implementation. So
the challenge here was to overcome the phenomenon of evaporating technological reforms brought in from the outside
(Cuban, 1986, Tyack & Cuban, 1995). A key question was: Can the teachers as a collective create in their school a
sustained movement that turns available information and communication technology tools into locally grounded means or
infrastructures of serious pedagogical change?
In the following, we will first introduce the concepts of myth, object and expansive action as key theoretical constructs to
be used in  our analysis. We  will also   briefly  describe    the procedures and  conceptual tools   of the  Knowledge  Work
Laboratory. After that, we will present and analyze data from the fall 2000 sessions of the Knowledge Work Laboratory,
demonstrating the nature of myths expressed in the teachers' discourse. We will then move on to an analysis of data from
the winter 2001 laboratory sessions in which we can see how a turn toward the object began to take shape and mediate a
transition toward expansive action. At the end, we will present some very preliminary conclusions, aware of the fact that
our analysis of the intervention process is still in progress.
MYTH, OBJECT AND EXPANSIVE ACTION
According to Roland Barthes (1972), "myth transforms history into nature." Myths eliminate the tensions of human activity
from our ways of speaking and thinking.
"The world enters language as a dialectical relation between activities, between human actions; it comes out of myth as
harmonious display of essences."
"Myth does not deny things, on the contrary, its function is to talk about them; simply, it purifies them, it makes them
innocent, it gives them a natural and eternal justification, it gives them a clarity which is not that of an explanation but that
of a statement of fact." (Barthes, 1972)
The language of myth " organizes a world which is without contradictions because it is without depth." In other words,
myth hides away contradictions, it harmonizes and normalizes them.
Myth may be contrasted with the concept of object. According to Leont'ev (1978), the object is the true motive of activity.
Object is the horizon of possible actions, a permanently unfinished project. As Jean Baudrillad puts it:
"In our philosophy of desire, the subject retains an absolute privilege, since it is the subject that desires. But everything is
inverted if one passes on to the thought of seduction. There, it is no longer the subject which desires, it's the object which
seduces. Everything comes from the object and everything returns to it, just as everything started with seduction, not with
desire. The immemorial privilege of the subject is overthrown." (Baudrillard, 1990)
Karin  Knorr-Cetina  (2000)  adds  the   important observation     that today's expert activities are increasingly  oriented at
epistemic objects with extraordinary holding power, motivating force and developmental perspectives.
A move from myth-driven to object-driven talk and action requires expansive actions. By expansive action we mean actions
which question the existing mythical definitions of the activity and redefine the object of activity in ways that radically
broaden the scope of possibilities for the community (Engeström, 1987).

KNOWLEDGE WORK LABORATORY AND ITS CONCEPTUAL TOOLS
Before  the actual intervention sessions,   we fist   videotaped    lessons where  teachers used   information  and  communication
technologies. After such a lesson, we asked the students and teachers (first separately, then jointly) to reflect and comment
critically on the lesson ­ the commentaries were also videotaped.
In the first laboratory sessions in the fall of 2000, the teachers watched and discussed selected excerpts from the lessons and
commentaries.   On the basis of  these   discussions, the teachers   selected nine topics and formed     nine groups to design    new
curriculum units to serve as spearheads of change. Plans for the new curriculum units were presented and discussed in sessions in
the winter of 2001. The new units were implemented in the spring of 2001, and implementation lessons were again videotaped.
At the end of the school year, the new units and their implementation were assessed jointly.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                     page   321

Figure 2. Two dimensions of change in instructional practice
Practices of school instruction and learning may be problematized along two dimensions: (1) the cognitive dimension,
ranging from procedure-oriented  drill to problem-     and principle-oriented knowledge production, and  (2) the socio-
motivational dimension, ranging from encapsulated classroom work to networked learning in partnerships between school
and organizations outside. We  used this  simple    two-dimensional framework   as a shared conceptual meta-tool in our
intervention sessions at the school (Figure 2).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 322

    Figure 3. Two models of instruction: variation is the mother of learning
Another central conceptual tool we used in the laboratory sessions distinguishes between two basic models of instruction (Figure
3). This tool is based   on Ference Marton's (personal communication)        insight: variation is the mother of learning. In the
traditional model A, variation is in the surface properties of basically similar tasks. In the challenging model B, variation is in the
different solutions produced by students to a single complex problem or task.

FALL SESSIONS: PARALYZING MYTHS
In the first laboratory sessions in the fall of 2000, the teachers repeatedly explicated two myths that were used as warrants for
rejecting the possibility of change in instructional practices. The first myth is crystallized in the statement "They just don't have
the basic skills. And basic skills can only be learned by Model A." The second myth is condensed in the statement " Certain
students only want to copy." Below is an example from the third laboratory session.
Excerpt 1: Laboratory session #3, November 1, 2000
DISCUSSION OF MODELS A and B
Teacher 13:      As I see it, in order to be able to work according to model B, they must first learn the basics about the subject,
                 they must have basic knowledge, and one almost has to do it according to the simple model A. Only when they
                 have some knowledge about the subject, then one can go deeper.

The two myths seemed to be unshakable. The more we challenged and questioned them, the more solid they seemed to be.
Against this background, we were quite relieved when the teachers actually did select topics and form groups for designing the
pilot curriculum units.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 323

WINTER SESSIONS: TURN TOWARD THE OBJECT
In late January, 2001, we started another set of three laboratory sessions, devoted to the presentation and discussion of the
teachers' plans for the new units. We were struck by how different the tone of these discussions was compared to the ones held
only some three months earlier. Pilot group 3 which designed a unit called `Project work and ICT professions' is a case in point.
During the planning process, the group took up and discussed their idea with the students who expressed enthusiasm for the idea
of studying ITC professions by actually taking the roles of different professionals in a real production process. Such a discussion
with students was an expansive action, quite atypical to the everyday instructional practice in the school. It meant that the
teachers plan was not merely an ideal image; it was already grounded in a turn toward the object, the students and their
concerns. Below is an example from the fourth session.

Excerpt 2: Laboratory session #4, January 31, 2001
PILOT GROUP 3: "PROJECT WORK AND ICT PROFESSIONS" (8th grade)
Teacher 3: Will all the students have sufficient skills? Such a question came up in our group.
Teacher 13: With us...
Teacher 4: They certainly will.
Teacher 13: Yes, they will. Our plan is that when the graphic artists, for example, are put into their own group, one of us, either
me or Annie and possibly someone else will be there all the time available, helping them. And the content producers will get
guidance from the Finnish language teacher, and so on.

Notice that Teacher 13 is the very same teacher who in Excerpt 1 insisted that complex tasks typical to model B cannot be
used because the students do not have sufficient basic skills. Now she had been member of a pilot group which had
designed a curriculum unit very much based on complex tasks of type B ­ and she insisted that the students will indeed
have sufficient skills. This kind of change was pervasive throughout all the nine projects. There was practically no use of
the two paralyzing myths in the three winter sessions. Excerpt 3 below sheds some light on the dynamics of this change.

Excerpt 3: Laboratory session #4, January 31, 2001
PILOT GROUP 3: "PROJECT WORK AND ICT PROFESSIONS" (8th grade)
Researcher:              Someone said that this is so fancy, did you mean too fancy? It is after all a fact that more and more
                         young people go into those professions...
Teacher 6:               Well, and a certain part of the students... some small part of the students will be really into it.
Teacher 20:              And I think it is very good to try, it doesn't matter if you try to accomplish a bit too much. What have
                         you got to lose, nothing!
Teacher 5:               Yes, and the outcome, it's not so clear what measures we use to assess it. I mean it's not the best
                         outcome that you've got the fanciest CD-ROM and the timing and division into groups were the
                         smoothest. It's an outcome and a result always when the process has worked...
Teacher 20:              ...We will help the students as much as we can and that will lead to an outcome, whatever it'll be. If
                         we do this in a traditional way, we won't learn from what we do now, and do it better next year, and
                         so on. We can all only succeed in this.
Teacher 3:      I guess many of us think that this pilot will waste, when you know those certain students, that it's a waste of
time...
Teacher 5:      Well, like Pat (Teacher 20) said, the idea was not to plan something traditional, where we pretty much write
the students' correct answers ahead of time, that this is how they'll answer. Wasn't this supposed to be a plan?

In this excerpt, Teacher 6 and Teacher 3 questioned the plan of the pilot unit as being too fancyand unrealistically demanding ­ a
waste of time for the majority of the students. Teacher 20 (Pat) defended the plan, pointing out that they had nothing to lose.
Importantly, Teacher 20 was not a member of this particular pilot group. She was a teacher of immigrant students, used to having
to find untraditional methods to reach students who do not know Finnish and have little idea of the workings of the traditional
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 324

Finnish classroom. Teacher 5 was a member of the pilot group. Challenged by the critics and supported by Pat, she nicely
captured the pedagogical idea of model B, as an opposite to "something traditional, where we pretty much write the students'
correct answers ahead of time."

PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS
In the case analyzed in this paper, the entire teaching staff of a middle school engaged in a year-long effort to change their
instructional practices by means of incorporating in formation and communication technologies in pilot curriculum units.
However, the means were not seen as the end ­ or to put in activity-theoretical terms, the tools were not confused the
object. The teachers set out to make pedagogical changes along two dimensions, from procedure-oriented drill to problem-
and principle-oriented knowledge production, and from encapsulated classroom work to networked learning in partnerships
between the school and organizations outside. They employed conceptual models, in particular the models designated as A
and B type of teaching (Figure 3), to anchor their change efforts `upward' in a long-term general vision. They also anchored
their change efforts `downward', in videotaped examples of classroom practice. Technical tools were subordinate to a
pedagogical object.
For the pedagogical object to gain momentum and become a true motive for the teachers, they needed to take expansive
actions that moved them from myth-driven to object-driven discourse. These expansive actions were actions of redefining
the students as capable, and consequently model B as possible. When pilot group 3 submitted its idea to discussion with
students, it took such an expansive action which in itself redefined the students as capable of having meaningful points of
view. On the other hand, the teachers' expansive actions of turning toward the object were in large part induced by and
performed in debates in the laboratory sessions. In both Excerpt 2 and Excerpt 3, the optimistic articulation of students as
capable and model B as possible happened through debate, in response to questioning, critique, and support. Of course
these discursive expansive actions had to be accompanied by equally expansive practical actions in classrooms. The two
require each other. The pulsating transitions between these different contexts of action are of crucial importance for the
accomplishment of sustainable innovation from below in a school community.

REFERENCES
Barthes, R. (1972). Mythologies. New York: Hill and Wang.
Baudrillard, J. (1990). Fatal strategies. London: Pluto.
Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (1993). Surpassing ourselves: An inquiry into the nature and implications of expertise.
       Chicago: Open Court.
Cuban, L. (1986). Teachers and machines: The classroom use of technology since 1920. New York: Teachers College
       Press.
Engeström, Y. (1987).  Learning   by expanding: An       activity-theoretical approach to developmental  research. Helsinki:
       Orienta-Konsultit.
Engeström, Y.  (1999).  Expansive    visibilization of   work: An  activity-theoretical   perspective. Computer    Supported
       Cooperative Work, 8, 63-93.
Engeström, Y., Engeström, R. & Suntio, A. (in press). Can a school community learn to master its own future? An activity-
       theoretical study of expansive learning among middle school teachers. In G. Wells & G. Claxton (Eds.) (in press),
       Learning for Life in the 21st Century: Sociocultural Perspectives on the Future of Education.
Hargreaves, A. (1997). Rethinking educational change. In M. Fullan (Ed.), The challenge of school change: A collection of
       articles. Arlington Heights: IRI/SkyLight.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Leont'ev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and personality. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Tyack, D. B. & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school reform. Cambridge: Harvard
       University Press.
