Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   333

J. (TECHNOLOGY TRACK): SYNCHRONOUS COLLABORATION SUPPORT
FOR CHILDREN

   Understanding Children's Interactions in Synchronous
                                        Shared Environments
                               Stacey D. Scott, Regan L. Mandryk, Kori M. Inkpen
                                                           EDGE Lab
                                             School of Computing Science
                                                  Simon Fraser University
                                             Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6 Canada
                                                     +1 604 291 3610
                                        {sdscott, rlmandry, inkpen}@cs.sfu.ca
ABSTRACT
Traditional computer technology offers limited support for face-to-face, synchronous collaboration. As a result, children
who wish to collaborate using computers must adapt their interactions to the single-user paradigm most personal computers
are based on. More recently, co-located groupware systems offering support for concurrent, multi-user interactions around a
shared   display have   become    technologically feasible.  Unlike   traditional  groupware   systems   that provide  multi-user
interaction through   the  use of  separate computers,  these systems   share the  physical   workspace,  as  well as  the virtual
workspace. These systems provide a unique mechanism through which children can interact with each other. However,
ways to best utilize the technology in this manner has not been fully evaluated. This paper investigates how technological
support for children's synchronous interactions facilitates their collaborative activities. In particular, we examined whether
a shared workspace facilitates the development of a shared understanding during a computer-based collaborative activity.
We present a field study that observed pairs of children playing an educational game in several display configurations. The
findings from this research suggest strengths and weaknesses of various types of support for synchronous interactions and
discusses issues related to the design and development of more effective computer systems to support children's face-to-
face interactions.

KEYWORDS
Shared   environments,  co-located  collaboration,  Computer    Supported Cooperative     Work   (CSCW),    Computer   Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL), educational games, children, experimental evaluation, communication

INTRODUCTION
Despite the many technological advances to support distributed interactions, people still spend a great deal of time traveling
to meet   face-to-face with  colleagues, family,  and  friends. Interacting in   a face-to-face  environment   is very engaging.
Numerous    research   and  commercial  endeavors   have   investigated technological   advances  in  an attempt   to capture  the
essence of face-to-face interactions when supporting people working at a distance (Fish et al., 1992; Gutwin et al., 1996;
Inoue et al., 1997). Most groupware research assumes that face-to-face collaboration provides a richer experience and thus
distributed groupware systems are often designed to recreate the feeling of "being there" (Gutwin et al.; 1996, Hollan &
Stornetta, 1992; Inoue et al., 1997). However, an equally important endeavor is the exploration of how technology can
enhance   and  improve    users' co-located  interactions. This is especially  important   when  considering   children's  use of
technology. Emergent environments such as home-use and portable computing are causing researchers to question the
fundamental designs that society has adopted as representative of a computer. Traditional interaction paradigms, such as the
one-keyboard one-mouse paradigm can be constraining to users and are slowly giving way to more flexible technologies,
such as large screen displays (Pedersen et al., 1993; Streitz et al., 1994; Tani et al., 1994) and handheld computers (Myers
at al., 1998). Still, these new    technologies are not sufficiently  addressing   the  needs of all users, specifically multiple
children sharing machines in the classroom (Inkpen et al., 1999).
Distance learning is currently a major research and industrial focus worldwide while the re-design of hardware and software
to support  co-located    learners in a  classroom   environment   is   explored   less frequently.  In most   classrooms  today,
synchronous collaboration is supported in three different ways: 1) children working together at the same computer; 2)
children working together on side-by-side computers; and 3) children working with others at a distance through networked
computers. Understanding students' communication and interaction patterns in these three configurations can help us gain
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   334

new insights into the strengths and weaknesses of each approach and discover issues related to the design of more effective
interactive systems for face-to-face collaboration.
Our work investigates children's interactions while playing a puzzle-solving mathematics game in various collaborative
configurations. We    examine  issues  surrounding  a shared  understanding    in a collaborative    task. Much  of the   previous
literature on cooperative learning suggests that shared goals, tasks, resources, and roles enhance shared understanding and
allow for an effective cooperative learning experience (see Hymel et al., 1993 for an overview). This paper presents
research related to co-located collaboration followed by a description of our field study, the methodology used, and the data
collected. Empirical results are presented and analyzed. Finally, we discuss the impact of this work for supporting co-
located collaboration, along with directions for future work.

BACKGROUND
The rich information available in co-located collaborative environments has spurred researchers to find novel ways of
supporting   multiple people working    together around   a shared display.   Research   in Single   Display  Groupware    (SDG)
(Stewart et al., 1999) has explored the development of co-located multi-user environments including connecting individual
computers to one large, passive display (Tatar et al., 1991, Tani et al., 1994), creating large, shared interactive displays
(Pedersen et al., 1993, Streitz et al., 1999), and providing multiple peripherals on a shared computer (Stewart et al., 1999,
Myers et al., 1998).
These aforementioned studies have been primarily focused on supporting co-located collaboration in the workplace. While
this is  important groundwork,     the  domain   of  children working    together   in the  classroom   has   unique   issues and
considerations. Children are smaller than adults, have no access to resources beyond what is provided at school or through
their parents, and have different goals. While professionals and students both have the motivation of deadlines imposed by
organizations or teachers, children need to experience enjoyment from their computer interactions in order to continue
investigating the possibilities that technology has to offer (Inkpen et al., 1997). There are many exciting toys and leisure
activities competing for children's time and interest. Children enjoy playing together and studies have shown that social
interactions in a learning environment lead to significant learning benefits and that there are positive academic and social
benefits to having children work together in groups (Hymel et al., 1993; Johnson et al., 1981).
In order to support children working together while maintaining the existing technological infrastructure available in most
schools, current systems  have  been    extended  to  accommodate     multiple children  using    one  computer.  This  has   been
accomplished using peripheral devices, such as styli (Bier & Freeman, 1991), joysticks (Bricker et al., 1999), and mice
(Scott et al., 2000; Stewart et al., 1999), to provide multi-user interaction. However, most of these solutions still require
specialized software development since most commercial software has been designed and implemented for use by a single
user. Other research has investigated the use of smaller and less expensive handheld computers in the classroom to support
collaborative educational  activities  (Mandryk  et  al., 2001), however,   these   devices are   often not  available  in school
environments.
Previous research suggests that shared displays provide certain advantages when computers are being used for collaboration
(Inkpen et al., 1995). Sharing a display provides a shared artifact for collaborators to use in their conversation, which has
been shown to increase attention and involvement during a collaborative task (Bly, 1988). Furthermore, research suggests
that users subconsciously respond to computers as social actors, potentially complicating the task of discussing shared
objects located on different screens (Reeves & Nass, 1996).
Although    providing a shared display  for co-located    collaboration seems  intuitive (i.e. it is a  natural way  to interact),
research has not clearly demonstrated that a shared display system supports concurrent multi-user interaction as well as
alternative display configurations such as side-by-side monitors, or distributed, networked computers. Children are very
good at engaging in rich face-to-face social interactions. Research has shown that students can become more motivated and
successful when these interactions are supported (Inkpen et al., 1999). Our study employed both quantitative and rich
qualitative measures to elucidate why these designs are successful and to evaluate the effectiveness of several display
configurations on a collaborative task.

FIELD STUDY
To   better understand  children's interactions  in   synchronous  shared   environments,    we   observed    children  playing a
collaborative  mathematical   computer   game.   The  children   were   given the   opportunity   to play   the game   in  various
configurations to support their collaborative interactions.

Students and Setting
Twenty-four grade seven students aged 11 to 13 (14 girls and 10 boys) from Lord Nelson Elementary School volunteered to
participate in the study. Lord Nelson is located in a lower socioeconomic, culturally diverse area of Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. Consent to participate was obtained from all children and their parents. The children played the game in
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  335

the a small room off the school's library and the researchers remained in the room to monitor the equipment, address issues
with the software, and take field notes of the children's interactions.
Children played the game using a personal computer with two universal serial bus mice. They used either one or two 19-
inch monitors, depending on which collaborative setup they were playing in. When each student was given their own
monitor, a VGA splitter was used to send the same output to the two monitors to simulate networked computers. This
ensured that the hardware performance was consistent across all three playing conditions. Observations of the children's
play were recorded by two video cameras, each with a lavaliere microphone. The children also wore audio headphones
through which they could hear the output from their partner's microphone. While this was necessary in the distributed
condition, it was also provided in the other configurations to minimize the novelty effect if the audio equipment. Although
this decision was important for the quantitative analyses, it may have negatively impacted the qualitative data gathered
from the non-distributed configurations.

Play Conditions
Children played the game in three different collaborative configurations: shared, side-by-side, and separated. In the shared
configuration  the subjects   were seated beside   each other,  sharing    a monitor  (see Figure   1a). In the side-by-side
configuration the subjects were seated beside each other, each having their own monitor (see Figure 1b). In the separated
configuration, subjects were seated in the same room, each with their own monitor attached to the same computer, but
visually separated by a divider (see Figure 1c). In each collaborative configuration, the children had their own mouse to
control their own on-screen character.

Game Description
The game the children played was a mathematical game called Prime Climb (see Klawe, 1998), originally developed as a
part of a distributed multi-player game,  Avalanche.  Prime    Climb    was  modified to produce  a stand-alone version that
supported multi-user interactions on a single computer. The MID Java API (Hourcade & Bederson, 1999) was used to
support concurrent, multi-user interactions within the game.
The goal of Prime Climb is to guide a pair of climbers to the top of a mountain, and to complete as many mountains (levels)
as possible. To finish a level, players must work together to move on-screen characters to the top of a mountain consisting
of stacked hexagon    blocks. Players  move to new  positions   by mouse-clicking  on    hexagons containing  numbers.  Two
climbers are displayed on the screen (red and blue), each controlled by a cursor of the corresponding colour. The climbers
are connected by a rope that can span at most three hexagons. Climbers can move only to a space adjacent to their current
location and must avoid obstacles (goats, rocks, and trees).
The main rule of the game is that the two climbers can never be positioned on numbers that have a common factor other
than one. If a player chooses an illegal number, their climber falls off of the mountain and begins swinging by the rope two
levels below his/her partner. A swinging player must select a nearby number on the mountain to stop swinging. If a
swinging player chooses an illegal number again, his/her partner falls and begins swinging. An additional feature of the
game is an ice pick, located in the upper-left corner of the game window. Dragging the ice pick to the mountain and
dropping it onto a hexagon decreases the value in the hexagon by one, to a minimum of one. When the players reach the top
of a mountain, a new mountain appears for the next level of the game. Levels increase in difficulty by adding more
obstacles, using larger numbers, and increasing the height of the mountains.

           (a)                                 (b)                                 (c)
Figure 1: Kids played the game in three different display configurations. a) Shared display configuration,
b) Side-by-side display configuration, c) separated display configuration.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page      336

                                 Figure2 : Screen shot of the Prime Climb game.
Game Playing Sessions
Each pair of students was excused from class on three separate occasions and were given the opportunity to play the game
in each of the collaborative configurations. During the first session, the students completed a background questionnaire to
gather information on their exposure to computers and games. Following this, the rules of the game were explained and the
children were given 15-minutes to play the game in one of the collaborative configurations. The children then returned for
two additional   15-minute sessions   to play in the remaining two collaborative configurations. After    each session,   the
children filled out an interface evaluation questionnaire to elicit opinions on game difficulty, enjoyment level, and mutual
understanding during their play. When a pair of students had completed all conditions, they filled out a post-experiment
questionnaire to determine overall impressions of the game and feedback on the three collaborative configurations.
The study spanned two weeks, during which pairs did not play in more than one session on the same day. The order in
which the children played the collaborative configurations was counterbalanced to avoid any order effects. Due to illness,
two pairs were unable to complete the experiment and data for only 20 children were fully collected.

Data Analyses
Both quantitative and qualitative data were gathered from several sources during the study, including field notes, video,
questionnaires, and computer logging. Computer log files tracked performance data including the number of mountains
completed, the game events, and the number of errors. Verbal and non-verbal communications were analyzed from the
video data using the MacShapaTM video analysis system. Inter-rater reliability was found to be high for both the verbal and
non-verbal coding schemes. Video data for a subset of the participants were transcribed and annotated with corresponding
field notes and computer log data. The conversation and gestures were coded and analyzed iteratively using the NVivoTM
qualitative analysis software package (Richards, 1999). Three pairs, two female pairs and one male pair, were selected
based on the order in which they performed the experimental conditions. Finally, questionnaire data from all pairs were
analyzed to provide further insights.
The decision   to employ   qualitative techniques together with quantitative research methods is     well supported  in   the
literature. Both  methods have their   own strengths and are best used to address their corresponding     research purposes
(Maxwell, 1996). Quantitative methods are best used to examine the differences between experimental conditions whereas
qualitative methods are best used to examine the process across or within experimental conditions. Both methods are
empirical in that they involve rigorous and systematic inquiry that is grounded in the data. Used together, the two methods
can be quite complementary (Firestone 1987; Miles & Huberman, 1994).

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
The goal of the present study was to gain insight into the strengths and weaknesses of sharing a display, when support for
concurrent activity is provided. Data were collected to promote understanding of students' interactions and communication
patterns when collaborating in different display conditions. After a brief vignette, we present and discuss some of the
insights gained during the study and subsequent analyses of the data. The vignette illustrates the type of interactions that
occurred during the game play.
Betty and Sarah are trying to finish a difficult level as fast as they can and are finding it difficult to make it up the
mountain without falling. Sarah is instructing Betty where she should go by calling out the numbers of where she
wants Betty to move. Betty falls when she and Sarah move simultaneously without conferring on where to go. She
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page     337

suggests that they should use a strategy where she stays on odds and Sarah stays on evens. They take turns moving up
the mountain and then begin to play in parallel when they are comfortable with their new strategy, sometimes calling
out their intent by simply saying a number. Unfortunately, Sarah falls near the top and has nowhere to land without
making Betty fall. Betty grabs the `pick' and decrements a number above where Sarah is swinging so that Sarah could
safety land there. Together they finish the level and Sarah does a `chair dance' of excitement.

Multi-User Interaction Styles
When children   work together,   they  often  use a variety    of collaboration styles, such as divide and  conquer,    or group
consensus. The collaboration styles that are available to children working on a typical computer are restricted by the
interaction technology (e.g., only one mouse and one keyboard). In this field study, the technology supported simultaneous
multi-user   interaction. Providing the children  with this    additional resource increased  the potential flexibility of  their
collaboration process. However, the constraints of the game were determining factors as well. In particular, two rules of the
game that affected the children's collaborative interactions were: 1) the players could move at most three positions away
from each other; and 2) the validity of the number chosen by one player was related to the current position of the other
player. These rules forced tightly coupled play and made it challenging to interact simultaneously. Nonetheless, informal
observations during the children's sessions indicated that some pairs chose to interact concurrently. To help understand the
type of interactions used by the children, including when they took advantage of the ability to interact simultaneously, we
performed in-depth analyses of the experimental sessions for three of the ten student pairs. These analyses were based on
the rough picture of the students' on-screen interactions that was provided by combining the computer logs with the session
transcripts.
Given the rules of Prime Climb, the simplest interaction style is strict turn-taking. This allows the students to evaluate the
partner's current number before choosing a new position. Interestingly, the pairs did not always use this interaction style.
Although the players started the experiment using strict turn-taking, some players preferred to make multiple moves per
turn, some pairs developed strategies that allowed players to select numbers independently of the partner's current position,
and some pairs preferred to move up the mountain quickly, in parallel. The parallel interaction style required each player to
anticipate the partner's next move and then to quickly choose a compatible number.
To mitigate the challenges of interacting concurrently within the game, some of the pairs negotiated play strategies. One
pair developed a strategy based on the type of numbers each player should land on, creating an "odds or evens" strategy.
This strategy worked well until the numbers became large. Others used short-term strategies that were sometimes unrelated
to the numbers and therefore not particularly successful. For instance, players would climb along the edge of the mountain
because they felt it would be easier. The players' goals also influenced their interaction styles. For example, the primary
goal of two of the pairs who interacted concurrently seemed to be to finish as many mountains as possible during the
session. Conversely, the players in a third pair had conflicting goals and rarely interacted simultaneously. One girl appeared
intent on reaching the top of the mountains quickly, but her partner seemed more intent on having fun by antagonizing her.
Overall, the goals of the players affected their game strategy and the game strategy often affected the interaction style used
by the players. Consequently, the children interacted in a variety of ways with the same hardware and software. Although
the in-depth qualitative analyses were only performed on three pairs, the findings support informal observations made of
the other 17 pairs during the experiment. This indicates that technology, especially multi-user technology, needs to be
flexible to account for this variation in interaction styles.

Communication
Our presupposition with regard to display conditions was that a shared display would lead to a shared understanding of the
workspace. When people view shared objects in the physical world, an individual has an understanding of both where the
object is and where their partner is in relation to themselves. This helps provide an implicit understanding of how their
partner views the object, potentially leading to a better shared understanding of the workspace. If artifacts in a virtual scene
are analogous to objects in the physical world, this same result may hold for virtual objects on a shared display. However, it
is unclear whether or not this phenomenon extends into shared virtual workspaces when users have separate visual displays
or are in separate physical locations.
The results of this study suggest that reaching a shared understanding of the workspace was more difficult when the
children were discussing on-screen objects in the conditions where they had separate visual displays. Consider Excerpt 1,
which was taken from one pair of children playing in the side-by-side display condition. In this excerpt one player, Scott,
has just tried to move to a number that shares a factor with his partner's current position. This action causes Scott's climber
to fall off the mountain and start swinging below David's player. David suggests that Scott move to "the 7" and he points at
that position on his own screen. Scott does not see where David is pointing though because Scott is still looking at his own
display. While clarifying his suggestion, David looks at the mountain on Scott's screen, even though their two displays are
showing the identical scene. This excerpt suggests that reaching a shared understanding regarding on-screen objects could
be facilitated by sharing a physical display.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page  338

Excerpt 1. Two children playing the game in the side-by-side display condition.
             [Scott's climber falls. David and Scott are both looking at their own displays.]
    David:   Oh...come up! [David points to his own display to show Scott where he should "come up". Scott is still
             looking at his own display]... oh [David seems to realize that Scott did not see where he was pointing]
             [David leans back from his own monitor and turns to look at Scott's screen]
    David:   Go to the 7...the bottom one. [Scott continues to try to get his climber back on the mountain]
    Scott:   This one? [Scott is still looking at his own screen]
    David:   Yeah. [Scott's climber is back on the mountain. David turns back to his own screen and resumes
             playing]

Data gathered from the questionnaires also supports the notion that a shared display can facilitate collaboration. After
completing each display condition, the students were asked to rate how well they understood their partner, on a five-point
scale (one corresponded to `always' while five corresponded to `never'). A Friedman two-way analysis of variance revealed
a marginally significant difference between the display conditions, 2(2,N=20)=5.5, p=0.063. On average, students reported
more strongly that they understood their partner in the shared condition (M=2.3, SD=1.3) than either in the side-by-side
condition (M=2.7, SD=1.3) or in the separated condition (M=2.6, SD=1.4). A similar trend was also apparent in student's
responses when asked, in each condition, how well they felt their partner understood them. These differences, although
subtle, support the notion that a shared display can help foster a shared understanding. Students felt strongly that there was
mutual comprehension in their communication when they viewed the virtual scene on the same physical display. However,
in the side-by-side and separated condition, even though the virtual scene was identical when viewed on separate screens,
these display configurations did not appear to evoke the same degree of response.

Effect of Display Condition on Student's Game Perception
If a shared display leads to a shared understanding of the workspace, it can be argued that it should be easier for students to
work together and solve puzzles. After each experimental condition, the students were asked to rate how easy the game was
to play on a five-point scale (one corresponded to 'easy' and five corresponded to 'hard'). A Friedman two-way analysis of
variance revealed a significant difference for perceived ease of use between the display conditions, 2(2, N=20)=10.7,
p<.01. The students, on average, rated the shared condition as being easier to play (M=2.3, SD=0.9) than the side-by-side
(M=2.8, SD=0.8) or the separate condition (M=2.9, SD=0.8). Since the students only played for a short amount of time (15
minutes), and because the software crashed during some of the sessions, it was not possible to compare the number of
mountains (game levels) completed in each condition. As a result, the performance data could not be used to validate the
students' perceptions of how easy it was to solve puzzles in each of the conditions.
Although   these  results are subjective,     and may   have  been  influenced by   external factors  unrelated         to the  display
configuration (e.g. time of day, mood, partner's behaviour), they are also supported by the post-experiment questionnaire1.
Fifteen of the twenty children stated that the shared condition was the easiest of the three display conditions to solve
puzzles in (2(2, N=20)=16.3, p<.001). Thus, the children's perception that it was easier to play in the shared condition was
consistent for both the evaluation of the interface after each condition, and the overall evaluation at the end of the study.

On the post-experimental questionnaire, the children reported why they found it easiest to solve puzzles in the shared
condition. The majority of their comments related to the fact that they could communicate more effectively and could help
each other when they were "right beside each other", in the shared display configuration. Table 2 groups the children's
responses into several categories for each display configuration along with an example remark for each.
           Table 2: Why children found the game easier to play in the different display configurations.
                   Why                       # of Remarks                       Example Remark

 Shared display:
 Close to partner                                     7   "We were right beside each other so we knew what to do"
 Ability to point and do things for partner       3       "If your partner didn't understand, you could do it for them"

1 The post-experiment questionnaire was completed after all three display conditions were played. This allowed the children
 to express  their  preferences across       display conditions. This questionnaire was in   addition to the      one      the children
 completed after each condition to evaluate the specific display condition in which they had just played.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page    339

 Better communication                            2       "We could see each other and communicate better"
 Same display                                    2       "Because we had the same screen"
 No reason given                                 1

 Side-by-side display:
 Separate displays                               2       "You get your own screen"
 Ability to point                                1       "They could point out what you're doing wrong"
 Better understanding                            1       "If you win you can see if she's happy or not, then you know what
                                                         happened"

 Separated Displays:
 Order related                                   1       "We did it last so we were getting used to the game"

Non-verbal Interactions Between Students
The   impact   of the   display configurations  on  the children's non-verbal   interactions with each        other is  important  to
understand. In the physical world, our non-verbal interpersonal interactions are very refined and play an important role in
our activities. How a computer environment enhances or impedes these interactions will ultimately impact its effectiveness
as a collaborative environment.

Pointing
The number of times children pointed in the various display conditions was gathered in the non-verbal coding of the video
data. In general, the children rarely pointed in any of the display conditions. Overall, six occurrences of pointing were
recorded in the shared condition, compared to two occurrences in the side-by-side condition, and one in the separated
condition. In face-to-face activities, pointing while interacting with shared artifacts is common and often helps to augment
the verbal  communication.      Our results, however,   showed  that this mode  of  communication       was   rarely   utilized when
children played in either of the two face-to-face conditions. This may be explained by the introduction of a virtual non-
verbal communication channel, which becomes available when users are provided their own on-screen representation, e.g.
their own  cursor.   It is possible  that  children chose  to "point" using  their cursor  as opposed     to   their   hand. Further
investigation is required to understand how this extra communication channel augments or replaces physical gestures.

Looking at Their Partner
In both the shared display and side-by-side conditions, it was possible for the players to see their partner. However, video
analyses revealed that players looked at their partner more often in the side-by-side display configuration (105 occurrences)
than in the shared configuration (85 occurrences). Although this difference was not statistically significant, qualitative
observations suggest that this trend is a result of students looking at their partner to increase awareness of their partner's
actions in the side-by-side condition. Visual focus may also have played a role in the users' awareness of each other's
actions. In the shared display configuration, the students' attention was focused on the same physical artifact (the computer
screen); thus, their  partner   was relatively close to the player's  center of visual focus. Conversely,       in  the side-by-side
condition, both the separate displays and the increased distance between players caused partners to be further away from
each other's center of visual focus when looking at their own displays. As a result, a player's awareness of their partner's
actions may have decreased in the side-by-side condition causing them to actively look at their partner more often to see
their partner's physical actions.

Enjoyment
After playing in each condition, students were asked to rate how much they enjoyed playing the game on a five-point scale
(one corresponded to `fun' while five corresponded to `not much fun'). No significant differences between the conditions
were found, 2(2, N=20)=4.1, ns, and in general, the students rated all three conditions as being somewhat fun (shared:
M=2.4, SD=1.4; side-by-side: M=2.75, SD=1.52; separated: M=2.6, SD=1.4). After playing in all conditions, students were
asked to choose which condition was the most fun to play. Of the twenty students, nine chose the separated condition, six
chose the shared condition, and five chose the side-by-side condition. This difference was not found to be significant,
2(2,N=20)=1.3, ns. The children's explanations of their choices were grouped into several categories for each display
configuration. These are shown in Table 3, along with an example remark for each category. The high variability of these
results, compared   with   the  results of which   display condition  was  easiest to use, indicates    that   the  children do   not
necessarily equate the easiest collaborative environment to the most fun environment. In fact, four students commented that
they enjoyed the challenge of the separated display configuration.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                     page 340

           Table 3: Why children found the game more fun to play in the different display configurations.

        Why                                     # of Remarks                         Example Remark
        Shared display:
        Sharing a display made it easier               3       "It was easier with one monitor which made it more fun"
        Can point at the display                       1       "She can point out which ones for me to go to"
        Miscellaneous                                  2       "It was the first time I played the game"

        Side-by-side display:
        Beside each other, but had own display         2       "You have your own monitor but you can see your partner"
        Can see partner                                3       "You can see the expression on their face when you mess up"

        Separated Displays:
        Needing the microphones                        2       "You actually needed the mikes and it was cool"
        Being separate was more challenging            4       "We couldn't see each other so it was more challenging"
        Couldn't see partner's actions                 2       "You couldn't see what the other was doing"
        Miscellaneous                                  1       "It was similar  to an Internet  game  and  talking to  a friend
                                                               combined"
A second factor that contributed to children preferring the separate display configuration was the necessity of the audio
equipment   (headphones   and     microphones)    for  communication    in  that   condition.   The   ability to   use technology   to
communicate with a partner, when they were separated, was very engaging for the children. As a result, several children
mentioned this novelty factor as their reason for preferring the separated condition. In contrast, the use of audio equipment
in the other two configurations was not essential for communication given that they were face-to-face. Consequently, even
though audio equipment was utilized in these two conditions, it appeared to be less of a contributing factor to children's
engagement.
Playing with a partner also added to the children's enjoyment of the game. Analysis of the post-experimental questionnaires
revealed that many of the students felt that having a partner made it easier to finish mountains (levels) in the game. This
preference was expressed by fifteen students when they played the shared and the side-by-side conditions but only eleven
students   when they    played   the separated  condition.    This   difference was   found    to be  marginally    significant,  2(2,
N=20)=5.3, p=0.069. Providing children with technology that supports multiple users allows children the option of playing
or working on computers with friends.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The results  of this work   further    our understanding   of  how   children   interact in  synchronous   shared   environments.   In
particular, the physical proximity of participants, the ability to utilize gestures, and the use of a shared physical workspace,
all positively influenced the students' collaborative experiences. In the physical world, these interactions are a natural part
of our daily lives. Unfortunately, current technologies do not adequately support these interactions in a seamless manner.
Continued work in this area is needed to fully understand its full potential for collaborative learning environments.
Although we observed many interesting trends, these results must be interpreted with caution. The small sample size,
limited playtime, and high variability among the pairs limited these analyses. Although there were hints of behavioural
change, fifteen minutes of play may not have been long enough for the children to develop an interaction style suited to a
particular display configuration.    Future   longitudinal   studies where  subjects     are given   time to  adapt   to each   display
condition will help address such issues.
Other areas for future investigation include the type of collaborative task and the application domain. The present study
required users to work together to reach the top of the mountain by solving mathematical problems. With such tightly
coupled  group  work,   partners  may    not have    had the opportunity to   explore    alternative collaborative  interaction  styles
afforded by each of the display configurations.
Most importantly,  beyond     all of the   intricate analyses, we  ultimately   cannot   forget  the preferences   of  those who  will
inevitably interact with these systems. Some students vocalized that they preferred the shared display simply because they
"had the same screen", but could not articulate why this configuration was important to them. Others were able to describe
the essence of the shared display configuration. One student felt that the physical proximity and shared screen enhanced
communication,   while   another     commented    that   the shared   display   was   easier  to  use  because   "cooperation    [was]
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page 341

dynamically increased". Although this is a complex research endeavor, the children effectively captured the spirit and
fundamental quality of the experience ­ having fun.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was funded by NSERC and the TeleLearning NCE. We would like to thank the E-GEMS group at UBC for
allowing us to use Prime Climb and for their assistance during our modifications. We would also like to thank Garth
Shoemaker, Daryn Mitchell, Wai-ling Ho Ching, and Michelle Daly for their assistance with software development and
video analysis. Thanks also to the other members of the EDGE lab for their assistance.

REFERENCES
Bier, E.A., & Freeman, S. (1991). MMM: A User Interface Architecture for Shared Editors on a Single Screen. In Proc. of
        UIST '91. 79-86.
Bly, S. (1988). A Use of Drawing Surfaces in Different Collaborative Settings. In Proc. of CSCW '88, 250-256.
Bricker, L.J., Bennett, M.J., Fujioke, E., & Tanimoto, S.L. (1999). Colt: A System for Developing Software that Supports
        Synchronous Collaborative Activities. In Proc. of the Ed-Media Conference, 587-592.
Firestone W. (1987). Meaning in method: The rhetoric of quantitative and qualitative research. Educational Researcher,
        (16), 16-21.
Fish, R.S., Kraut, R.E., & Root, R.W. (1992). Evaluation Video as a Technology for Informal Communication. In Proc. of
        CHI '92, 37-48.
Gutwin, C., Greenberg,   S.  &  Roseman,   M.  (1996).  Workspace  Awareness    in     Real-Time Distributed  Groupware:
        Framework, Widgets, and Evaluation. In Proc. of HCI '96, 281-298.
Hollan, J. & Stornetta, S. (1992). Beyond Being There. In Proc. of CHI '92, 119-125.
Hourcade, J. & Bederson, B. (1999). Architecture and Implementation of a Java Package for Multiple Input Devices (MID).
        Technical Report CS-TR-4018 University of Maryland.
Hymel S., Zinck B.,   &  Ditner E. (1993). Cooperation  versus competition  in the   classroom.  Exceptionality Education
        Canada, 3:1-2, 103-128.
Inkpen, K., Booth, K.S., Klawe, M., & Upitis, R. (1995). Playing together beats playing apart, especially for girls. In Proc.
        of CSCL '95, 177-181.
Inkpen, K. (1997). Three Important Research Agendas for Educational Multimedia: Learning, Children and Gender. Proc.
        of Educational Multimedia '07, Calgary AB, June 1997, 521-526.
Inkpen, K.M., Ho-Ching, W., Kuederle, O., Scott, S.D., & Shoemaker, G.B.D. (1999). "This is fun! We're all best friends
        and we're all playing.": Supporting children's synchronous collaboration. In Proc. of CSCL `99, 252-259.
Inoue, T., Okada, K., & Matsushita, Y. (1997). Integration of Face-to-face and Video-mediated Meetings. In Proc. of
        GROUP '97, 405-414.
Johnson D.W., Maruyana G., Johnson R,T, (1981). Effects of cooperative, competitive, and individualistic goal structures
        on achievement: A meta-analysis. Psychology Bulletin, 89(1), 47-62.
Klawe, M. (1998). When does the use of computer games and other interactive multimedia software help students learn
        mathematics? In Proc. of the Technology and NCTM Standards 2000 Conference.
Mandryk, R.L., Inkpen, K.M., Bilezikjian, M., Klemmer, S.R., & Landay, J.A. (2001). Supporting Children's Collaboration
        Across Handheld Computers. In Extended Abstracts of the Proc. of CHI'01, 255-256.
Maxwell J.A. (1996). Qualitative Research Design: An interactive approach. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Miles M.B. & Huberman A.M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis (2nd Ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Myers, B.A., Stiel, H., & Gargiulo, R. (1998). Collaboration using multiple PDAs connected to a PC. In Proc. of CSCW
        '98. 285-294.
Pedersen, E. McCall, K., Moran, T., & Halasz, F. (1993). Tivoli: An Electronic Whiteboard for Informal Workgroup
        Meetings. In Proc. of InterCHI '93. 391-398.
Reeves, B., & Nass, C. (1996). The Media Equation, Cambridge University Press.
Richards, L. (1999). Using NVivo in Qualitative Research, SAGE Publications, London.
Scott, S.D., Shoemaker, G.B.D., & Inkpen, K.M. (2000). Towards Seamless Support of Natural Collaborative Interactions.
        In Proc. of Graphics Interface 2000, 103-110.
Stewart, J., Bederson, B.B, & Druin, A. (1999). Single Display Groupware: A Model for Co-present Collaboration. In Proc.
        of CHI `99, 286-293.
Streitz, N.A., Geibler, J., Haake, J.M., & Hol, J. (1994). DOLPHIN: Integrated Meeting Support across Local and Remote
        Desktop Environments and Liveboards. In Proc. of CSCW '94. 345-358.
Streitz, N.A., Geibler, J., Holmer, T., Konomi, S., Müller-Tomfelde, C., Reischl, W., Rexroth, P., Seitz, P., & Steinmetz, R.
        (1999). i-LAND: An Interactive Landscape for Creativity and Innovation. In Proc. of CHI '99, 120-127.
Tani, H., Horita, M., Yamaashi, K., Tanikoshi, K., & Futakawa, M. (1994). Courtyard: Integrating Shared Overview on a
        Large Screen and Per-user Detail on Individual Screens. In Proc. of CHI '94. 44-50.
