Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page   342

            Interfaces to Support Children's Co-present
 Collaboration: Multiple Mice and Tangible Technologies
                                Danaë Stanton,1 Helen Neale2, Victor Bayon3
            1CREDIT, School of Psychology, 2Virtual Reality Applications Research Team,
                                              3 Mixed Reality Lab
                                           University of Nottingham
                                                 University Park
                                                   Nottingham
                                                   NG2 2RD
                                                      UK
       1Danae.Stanton@nottingham.ac.uk 2Helen.Neale@nottingham.ac.uk 3Vxb@cs.nott.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper summarises two different approaches using technology to support young children's collaborative interaction in a
classroom setting. KidPad, a 2½D drawing package with zooming capabilities, was adapted for use with multiple mice and
tangible interfaces. The first section of the paper focuses on a study carried out to evaluate the effect of multiple mice on
children's collaborative behaviour at a desktop computer. Positive effects of the use of two mice included symmetry of
mouse use amongst pairs and a greater degree of engagement in the task. However a number of usability issues were
identified when children attempted to collaborate, particular problems were faced when the shared control was taken away,
and one of the users took control, for example, when navigating. Different types of working styles were also evident
between the one mouse and two mice conditions. The second section of the paper describes a move away from the desktop
computer towards room-based technologies. Tangible interfaces to KidPad were developed in order to facilitate shared
control over actions such as navigation where difficulties had been identified in a desktop situation. The visibility of action
is highlighted as a fundamental element in the support of collaboration on a larger scale. Finally, future work and the
potential of these technologies in encouraging shareable co-present interaction in a real school context are briefly discussed.

Keywords
Collaboration, children, evaluation, usability, tangible interfaces, single display groupware

INTRODUCTION
Group work with young children is well established in British schools (Galton and Williamson, 1992) and research in
psychology and education has consistently demonstrated that working in pairs and small groups can have advantageous
effects on learning and development, especially in young children (Rogoff, 1990; Topping, 1992; Wood & O'Malley,
1996).
The role of the computer in supporting collaborative learning has been examined (Barfurth, 1995; Crook, 1994, O'Malley,
1992). Littleton (1999) suggests that the computer is not just capable of supporting collaborative behaviour, but is unique in
that it can transform the way in which collaborative activity is structured. A limited number of computers in schools and an
emphasis on group work in the UK school curriculum means that it is important to examine "how new technology (can)
serve effectively to resource collaborative arrangements for learning?" (p.122, Crook, 1994).
Traditional computer software and hardware has been designed with only one user in mind, two users must share a mouse
and control over one cursor on the screen. This may result in an unequal balance between two children collaborating in this
situation. For example, Light and Glachan's (1985) study found that boys are more likely to take control of the mouse when
access was limited.
The aim  of the KidStory  project  is to develop new technologies that support        small   group collaboration within the
classroom. The main focus of this research is to support young children (aged 6 and 7) to collaborate in the creation and re-
telling of stories, using technologies specifically design for this. Over the last 3 years researchers have built up a close
working relationship with teachers and children in school. This has allowed children and teachers to influence technology
design using a `participatory' or `co-operative' approach (for more information on the design process please see Neale, in
preparation, Taxen, 2001). It has also meant that the authors have been able to assess the impact of technologies, designed
to support collaboration, and modify, refine and improve them to take into account usability, functionality and issues
regarding the school context.
The first part of this paper describes the development and use of multiple input devices. An evaluation study has been
conducted to investigate the impact of 2 mice on pairs of children's story creation.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  343

The second part of this paper focuses on tangible interfaces to KidPad to support group learning in the classroom.

MULTIPLE MICE TO ENCOURAGE CO-PRESENT COLLABORATION
Standard computer systems are designed to support single users working alone, however, within schools it is common for
pairs or small groups to work together around a computer, and for them to collaborate on a shared task. Even though two or
more children may collaborate verbally, only one child at a time has control of the computer. The recognition that group
work around a single display is desirable for many groups of users has led to the development of software and hardware
that is designed specifically to support this. There are a number of difficulties in developing computer systems that support
multiple input devices, however   recently technical advances   have been     made in Single  Display  Groupware   (Stewart,
Bederson and Druin, 1999).
Single Display Groupware (SDG) allows two or more co-located users to interact with a computer system simultaneously
whilst feedback is provided via a single display screen. SDG therefore enables all participants to input to the same piece of
computer-based work. This type of software could be used to support a number of different situations where two or more
people are gathered around a computer, all commenting on, interacting with, or editing the same artefact.
Very few studies have been conducted to examine the effect of multiple input devices on collaborative interactions and so
little is known about how they may influence behaviour. Reported here is a summary of the studies that have examined
SDG use.
Inkpen, Booth, Gribble and Klawe (1995) examined children's use of commercial computer games, and found that they
were more motivated when playing together on a single machine, as opposed to playing side by side on computers or by
themselves. The effect of giving each user an input device, even if only one could be active at a time was then examined
and significant learning improvements were found (Inkpen, Booth, Klawe and McGrenere, 1997). Preliminary results from
a study of pairs of students working together using SDG to complete a problem solving task indicate that children using two
mice demonstrate higher levels of activity and less time off task (Inkpen, Ho-Ching, Kuederle, Scott and Shoemaker, 1999).
Stewart, Raybourn, Bederson and Druin (1998) observed that children with access to multiple input devices seemed to
enjoy an  enhanced   experience, with the  researchers observing increased     incidences of student-student interaction and
student-teacher interaction as well as changing the character of the collaborative interaction. The children also seemed to
enjoy their experience more, compared with earlier observations of them using similar software on standard systems. The
availability of an input device for each child also suggests that no one child would be able to monopolise the task (Stewart
et al, 1999). Stewart et al (1999) do however recognise that some negative effects on behaviour may occur with SDG use.
For example, task completion may take longer, as no one user can direct the product, also the opportunity to work in
parallel may mean that users in fact collaborate less than when they had to share one form of input.
Abnett, Stanton, Neale and O'Malley (2000) found some gender effects when using two mice with KidPad. Interaction with
two input devices led to greater equity between gender pairings, while interaction when using one mouse led to poorer
performance in mixed gender and male gender pairs.
Thus there is some evidence that the use of multiple input devices improves motivation, effectiveness of task completion
(through parallel or co-operative work), equity of activity and time on task.
In some cases SDG applications have been specifically designed to force or encourage users to collaborate. In one study,
multiple users were each given control of one aspect of an activity and therefore had to work together in order to reach their
goal (Bricker, Baker and Tanimoto, 1997). Rather than forcing users to carry out actions, some SDG applications are
designed to encourage people to actively take part in group activities (Sugimoto, Kunsunoki, and Hashizume, 2000) or to
enhance the results of activities carried out when these are achieved by working collaboratively with others (Benford,
Bederson, Akesson et al, 2000).
One of the major goals of the first year of the KidStory project was to develop technologies that supported collaboration
around a desktop computer. As well as supporting multiple mice, software was developed to encourage children to work
together. Two pieces of software `KidPad' and the `Klump' were developed with functionality's designed to encourage
collaboration (Benford et al, 2000). Only KidPad is elaborated upon here as more extensive studies in schools have been
undertaken with it.
KidPad is a collaborative authoring tool designed for children (Druin, Stewart, Proft, Bederson and Hollan, 1997). KidPad
enables children to draw, edit and write stories using links to connect elements of their story. They can then use these links
to `zoom' to objects that may not appear within screen shot.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 344

Figure 1. A typical KidPad story created by a class of 7-year-olds. Only one part of the story is visible. By zooming in/out
or navigating left/right or up/down it is possible to view the other parts of the story or access blank space to create more
content. In this case at that level of zooming it is only possible to view 1/9 of the graphical representation.

Collaboration with multiple input devices
An observation study was carried out where pairs of children were asked to complete a storytelling task in KidPad using
either one or two mice. From the results of previous studies examining multiple mice use, as well as informal observations
of KidPad use, it was hypothesised that the use of multiple mice would produce less off task behaviour and also greater
synchrony of mouse use in line with Inkpen et al's (1999) findings. However, the study also aimed to explore, in detail, the
effect of multiple mice on collaborative dialogue and computer-based interactions. Analysis was facilitated by mixing video
capture of both the computer screen, and the children, enabling the development of a coding scheme (see figure 2). A
detailed account of how the study was carried out and the outcomes in terms of collaborative behaviours can be found in
Stanton and Neale (in preparation).

Method
Twelve pairs of children aged between 6 and 7 years used KidPad to carry out a creative task. Six of the pairs carried out
the task using KidPad with only one mouse while the remaining six pairs used two mice. Children chose a classmate who
they wanted to work with. The groups were balanced in terms of ability and gender. The children who took part in the study
were familiar with the researchers who had been working in with the school for the previous eighteen months. They were
also familiar with KidPad and its features.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page 345

                                                            Figure 2. Video capture of the children
                                                            and on screen activity enabled analysis
                                                            of talk and actions.

The study took place in the corner of the classroom during an academic lesson, usually English literacy. The children were
introduced to the task and told that they were to use KidPad to recreate a poem. The poem used was `Twinkle, Twinkle
chocolate bar', a poem they had previously read in class. The children were encouraged to work together and were told that
their KidPad story was to be presented to their teacher on completion.
Results
For the entire period of computer use, children's activities were recorded to identify whether they were active and on task;
inactive but still on-task; or off task.
In the one mouse condition 42% of the time was spent actively drawing, writing or creating their story in comparison to
73.30% of the time with 2 mice. In the one mouse condition children were non-active (involved in the task, either watching
what their partner was doing, instructing, or commenting, but not actually using an input device) 48.28% of the time while
in the two mice condition the children were non-active 17% of the time.
Non attentive behaviour (such as looking away from the computer screen) was found to be low for both the one mouse and
   the two mice conditions 3.42% and 0.9% respectively. However in the one mouse condition there were cases where
                             children were non-attentive for 9% and 16.22% of the time.

                 Pair 13

                 Pair 11

                  Pair 9

                  Pair 7

                  Pair 5

                  Pair 3

                         0%                20%          40%         60%            80%         100%

Figure 3. Distribution of mouse use between left-hand side and right-hand side (1 mouse)

Figure 3 and Figure 4 illustrate the distribution of active mouse use between the left-hand and right-hand partners. In the 2-
mouse condition input was fairly symmetrically distributed. However in the one mouse condition the patterns are more
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 346

asymmetric, with individuals dominating. For example, in pair 7 one of the pair has the mouse for 98% of the total task
time.

                 Pair 12

                 Pair 10

                 Pair 8

                  Pair 6

                  Pair 4

                  Pair 2

                         0%          20%             40%            60%           80%         100%

           Figure 4. Distribution of mouse use between left-hand side and right-hand side (2 mice)

Access to the mouse does not necessarily portray the full picture of collaborative behaviour and it is important to look for
indicators `beneath the surface' to find out who is controlling the collaborative actions and contributing to the production of
ideas (Cole, 1995). The person in control of the mouse may be physically active but not psychologically active. A more
detailed analysis of the interactions between the pairs was carried out (for a more detailed account see Stanton and Neale, in
prep). Previous work in this area has focused primarily on talk and less on actions, in the study presented here actions were
analysed alongside talk as they often indicate important parts of the interaction such as acceptance of ideas or children may
input ideas directly onto the computer without verbalising them.
Collaboration Networks have been used to code and represent collaborative interactions around the computer. This method
was developed specifically to address some of the deficiencies in existing methods in the analysis and presentation of
complex collaborative processes. Both verbal and computer-based interactions are recorded and visually represented in
terms of the temporal and evolutionary path that the interaction has taken (Neale and Stanton, in press).
The exploration of collaborative interactions amongst pairs using either one or two mice identified a number of patterns of
collaborative behaviour. Many of the differences between collaborative styles were due to individual differences between
pairs; however, the authors did recognise certain styles common to both one mouse and two-mouse use. When two mice are
available to the pair, they tend to work co-operatively,  they    create computer representations on      their own, usually
verbalising what they are doing, but are not encouraged to discuss aspects of the task. There is noticeably less verbal
reciprocity between the partners when they have a mouse each.
When one mouse was available some pairs demonstrated high levels of collaborative activity, where ideas were discussed
with contributions from both partners before they were implemented on the computer. Other pairs demonstrated low levels
of collaborative interaction, where one partner dominated the work, leading to an asymmetric distribution of idea input and
creation.
The evaluation study found some advantage of using 2 mice such as the symmetry of input afforded by 2 mice, the higher
levels of engagement with the task and increased productivity with more overall time for creation. These results support
work by others such as Inkpen et al (1999). However a detailed examination of the interaction taking place also uncovered
different styles of behaviour attributed to the number of mice used and formally confirms some of the points raised by
Stewart et al (1999). The use of 2 mice seems to encourage a co-operative and parallel style of working while we have
found considerably more elaboration/extension of ideas taking place before these ideas are implemented on the computer
when pairs share one mouse. On occasions when a pair has one mouse, low levels of collaborative behaviour have been
observed, with one partner dominating and directing.
Multiple input devices at the desktop have been seen to facilitate pairs of children in actively working on a shared task at
the same time. There are however a number of limitations to the ability of this type of technology to support small group
work. Firstly the physical size of the output device means that it could never support more than a few users working
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page    347

simultaneously. At most 3 or 4 children could sit around and input to a single desktop computer. A number of usability
problems  related to multiple   users have  been   identified from  observing  this technology in use.   Most of  the actions
facilitated by the software enabled two or more users to work at the same time, a few of the actions only allowed one
partner to carry them out, for example, navigation, often disabling or disrupted their partner from carrying on with their
task. This often caused confusion and frustration.

TANGIBLE TECHNOLOGIES TO ENCOURAGE CO-PRESENT COLLABORATION
In this section tangible technologies are defined and reasons why they may be beneficial in terms of collaboration are
outlined. One particular interface `the magic carpet' is discussed, and some informal observations of use are detailed.
The approach taken within years 2 and 3 of the KidStory project to interface development has mostly focused on physical
and tangible interfaces (see Stanton, Bayon, Neale et al, 2001). Physical in that the interaction is based on movement and
tangible in that objects are to be touched and grasped.
In HCI research there has been a general move towards, and much support for, the development of tangible and mobile
interfaces to facilitate computer use (e.g. Norman, 1999). Many of the types of interfaces that are being created support
socially  based activities. Research  is being carried  out using   tangible and physical interfaces for children's play  and
learning (see Bobick, Intille, Davis et al, 2000; Ryokai and Cassel, 1999; Strommen, 1998). Other authors have developed
devices to aid children's computational skills in a collaborative context, for example see `curlybot' (Frei, Su, Mikhak and
Ishii, 2000) and a study by, Kynigos and Giannoutsou (2001) which used GPS to examine spatial and orientation concepts
when groups of 7 year olds carried out collaborative cartography. In spite of these recent developments, little is known
about the influence of tangible technology on collaborative learning, particularly with children in a school environment.
In the KidStory project tangibles have been developed as interfaces that inherently support small group collaboration
amongst young children. Much of this development was also based around the KidPad software, described in the above
sections. When working in a school it became clear that if the teacher was to be involved in using the technology with a
sub-set of her class, then the rest of the class needed to be able to participate in the experience in some way. Replacing a
standard monitor with a large projected screen helped to accomplish this. A number of different input devices were used to
allow multiple users to interact with KidPad carrying out different functions, for example, creating a scene, creating a
sound, and navigating, were all carried out using different input devices. This section will focus on one particular input
device `the magic carpet'.
The Magic Carpet is a collaborative tangible interface based on 12 floor sensors, with 3 sensors arranged on each side to
create a square. KidPad is usually projected onto a large screen in front of the carpet, providing a display that can be clearly
seen by groups of users. Children interact with the Magic Carpet by standing on its pressure sensitive sides. This input
device allows users to travel forwards into the KidPad scene, backwards to zoom out of the scene, and left and right (a
separate input device was used to travel along a third axis, up and down). To travel forwards, users stand at the front of the
carpet; to travel backwards they stand at the back, and so forth. The number of sensors activated at any time affects the
viewpoint in KidPad. Multiple sensors may be activated at the same time altering the way in which the user navigates
through KidPad. It is possible to, for instance, zoom in and move right by standing at the front and the right side of the
carpet and activating the sensors on those sides of the magic carpet, or zoom in faster by standing and activating all 3 of the
sensors at the back of the magic carpet.
The design of the magic carpet meant that interaction was scaled up, allowing larger groups of children to interact with the
technology simultaneously. Sensors were widely distributed about the carpet, meaning that many children could use the
carpet at the same time, in fact benefits were found by multiple users working together to navigate.
A key factor of moving technology into a larger space, providing room for objects to become organised spatially, is that the
visibility of other people's actions is increased. Initially the magic carpet was used to re-tell stories created on a desktop
version of KidPad. Informal observation of these sessions indicated that navigation using the magic carpet drew children's
attention to the  spatial features of KidPad   and  in  contrast to the desktop  a  considerable amount   of time was   spent
navigating. Navigation became a collaborative activity rather than a one-person process. The physical size of the carpet and
the visibility of actions meant that group interaction was encouraged as well as navigation. The set-up enabled all of the
group members to contribute and they worked as a team.
Figures 5, 6 and 7 illustrate a group of children using the magic carpet to retell a story to their peers. In the first image the
children are all on the left hand side of the carpet moving the image on screen to the left. In the middle image one of the
children is indicating that they are going in the wrong direction to get their pictures. The third image illustrates the move of
all interactors to the right hand side of the carpet. By all working together to navigate they are moving faster than one child
carrying out this action alone.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page 348

                                                                    Figure 5 Children move the viewpoint by
                                                                       standing on the left-hand side of the

                                                                       Figure 6 One child realises that they
                                                                    need to travel in the other direction and
                                                                    points in the direction she wants them

                                                                   Figure 7 All of the children move over to
                                                                   the right hand side of the carpet to move
                                                                     the viewpoint in the other direction

These findings are only informal observations, however, an in depth evaluation of a spatially distributed tangible set-up has
recently been carried out and is currently being analysed (see Stanton et al., in prep). Collaboration on a story creation task
using tangible technologies is examined in terms of its ability to encourage and support collaborative behaviour. Four
children used a variety of the tangible technologies,    including the magic carpet over three sessions. The technology
consisted of a large display in which they could input pictures (using PDA's, a webcam and a scanner) and sounds (using
RFID tags) and navigation using an arrangement of sensors `the magic carpet'. The children could then retell their story
using bar-coded images and sounds. Pending results from this study will provide new information about how children
collaborate when using tangible interfaces.

DISCUSSION
Until recently most of the technology developed to aid computer assisted learning was designed with one user in mind
regardless as to the activities around the computer.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page     349

O'Malley   (1992)     presents   three  classifications of  the role of   the computer    in collaborative settings. The   third  of her
classifications    is termed  `Learning     mediated  via   the computer'     where   she describes  the computer    as a   tool, which
`augments' collaborative learning with the technology designed for pair or group activities. With careful structuring of the
activity, desktop     KidPad   with   2   mice fits  neatly within   this classification. However   O'Malley    suggests  that there  is
probably a continuum of roles rather than a strict categorisation and we would suggest that tangible technology is further
along that continuum. While asynchronous interaction is reported to allow reflection and reaction time, the visibility of
actions when using tangible technologies allows multiple users to carry out synchronous interaction while maintaining
awareness of the collective collaborative action.
Although there has been a rapid advance in the design and use of technologies, such as SDG and tangible interfaces, formal
evaluation is still limited. Here we have outlined ways in which these two types of technology have been used to encourage
collaboration in educational settings. A formal study evaluating the use of one or two mice indicates that two mice produce
a more even symmetry of use and higher levels of task engagement. However mouse use reflects very different working
styles with two mice favouring co-operative work and 1 mouse favouring more collaborative working styles. The potential
of tangible interfaces for group activities in the classroom has been discussed; preliminary observations identify that the
physicality of inputs, the spatial distribution of the set-up and the visibility of actions are important factors in aiding
collaborative behaviour. Ongoing work aims to evaluate children's collaborative learning with tangible technologies.
The children using the technologies described in this paper have all been between 6-7 years old. Interaction with tangibles
may be well suited to very young children because of their physicality, as mouse co-ordination skills or verbal ability would
not limit children. One of the teachers involved in the project over the last 3 years stated that a major advantage of the
tangible  technologies      was  that  the less  able students   (in terms    of reading  and  writing ability) were  able  to   express
themselves.
Desktop KidPad and variations of KidStory tangible technologies continue to be used within classrooms, in pairs, small
groups and for whole class sessions. The success of this integration is summed up in the Ofsted report (school inspection
board in the UK) who state under "Good teaching, alongside a vibrant and rich curriculum, means that learning is effective:
- Visitors to school add an extra dimension to the whole curriculum. An excellent example is the involvement of the
Kidstory team from Nottingham University. The project aims to encourage the pupils to work collaboratively together, and
it is very successful. It has been in place for three years, giving the pupils an opportunity to use a range of new technologies
for communication. In the lesson seen pupils worked very effectively to create different parts of their story, using new
technology."

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been conducted as part of the KidStory project funded by ESPRIT (#29310). The authors acknowledge
support from project partners at CREDIT, VIRART and CRG University of Nottingham, SICS and KTH in Sweden and
The University of Maryland, USA. We would particularly like to thank Ben Bederson for KidPad and his continuing
enthusiasm in developing it (to download KidPad please see www.kidpad.org) and Camilla Abnett for her help with data
collection. Thanks also to the teachers and children at Albany Infant School, Nottingham for their collaboration in this
work.
REFERENCES
Abnett, C., Stanton, D., Neale, H and O'Malley (2001) The effect of multiple input devices on collaboration and gender
          issues. In the Proceedings of European Perspectives on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (EuroCSCL)
          2001, March 22-24, Maastricht, the Netherlands. p.29-36.
Barfurth, M.A. (1995) Understanding the collaborative learning process in a technology rich environment: The case of
          children's disagreements. In the proceedings of CSCL 1995.
Benford,   S., Bederson,     B., Åkesson,     K.-P., Bayon,   V., Druin,   A.,   Hansson,  P., Hourcade,   J., Ingram,  R., Neale,   H.,
          O'Malley,     C., Simsarian,    K.,  Stanton, D.,  Sundblad,    Y., &   Taxén,  G.,  Designing storytelling   technologies  to
          encourage collaboration between young children. CHI 2000 pp. 556-563.
Bobick,   A.,  Intille, S., Davis,    J., Baird, F.,  Pinhanez,  C.,  Campbell,    L., Ivanov,  Y., Schutte,   A., & Wilson,   A.,   The
          KidsRoom:      A  perceptually-based      interactive and  immersive    story   environment. Presence:    Teleoperators    and
          Virtual Environments, 8(4), 367-391, 2000.
Bricker,  L.   J., Baker,   M.   J., &    Tanimoto,  S. L.  (1997).  Support     for cooperatively  controlled  objects in  multimedia
          applications. Paper presented at the Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems (CH'97), Atlanta, GA
Cole, K.A. (1995) Equity issues in computer based collaboration: Looking beyond surface indicators, In Proceedings of
          CSCL 95, http://www-cscl95.indiana.edu/cscl95/cole.html
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 350

Crook C. (1994) Learning within peer collaborations. In Charles Crook, Computers and the Collaborative Experience of
         Learning. Routledge, London.
Druin, A., Stewart, J., Proft, D., Bederson, B., & Hollan, J,. KidPad: A design collaboration between children, technologists
         and educators. CHI97 pp. 463-470.
Frei, P, Su, V., Mikhak, B., and Ishii, H. (2000). Curlybot: Designing a New Class of Computational Toys. In Proceedings
         of Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2001) ACM Press, pp.129-136.
Galton, M. and Williamson, J (1992) Group work in the Primary classroom. Routledge, London
Inkpen, K., Booth, K.S., Gribble, S.D. and Klawe, M. (1995). Playing together beats playing apart, especially for girls.
         Proceedings of CSCL'95
Inkpen, K. M., Booth, K. S., Klawe, M., & McGrenere, J. (1997). The Effect of Turn-Taking Protocols on Children's
         Learning in Mouse-Driven Collaborative Environments. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface (GI 97) Canadian
         Information Processing Society, pp. 138-145.
Inkpen, K.M., Ho-Ching, W., Kuederle, O., Scott, S.D. and Shoemaker, G.B.D. (1999). "This is fun! We're all best friends
         and we're all playing": Supporting children's synchronous collaboration. Proceedings of CSCL 99
Kynigos,  C.  and Giannoutsou,    N.  (2001). Seven    year olds  collaborating to construct a map  using  GPS    and space
         representation software.  In  the  Proceedings of  European  Perspectives   on Computer-Supported     Collaborative
         Learning (EuroCSCL) 2001, March 22-24, Maastricht, the Netherlands. p.364.
Littleton, K. (1999). Productivity through interaction: An overview. In K. Littleton and P. Light (Eds.) Learning with
         Computers: Analysing productive interaction. Routledge. Londonp.179-194.
Light, P.  &  Glachan,    M.   (1985) Facilitation of  individual problem solving   through  peer  interaction, Educational
         Psychology, 5, 3-4, 217-225.
Neale, H.R. & Stanton, D. (In press) Evaluating verbal and computer-based interactions using collaboration
         networks. Computer Support for Collaborative Learning. (CSCL) 2002. Boulder, Colorado, USA.
         January 7th-11th.
Neale, H. Stanton, D. (in preparation) Supporting co-present creative tasks: design issues for Single Display Groupware
Neale, H.,   Stanton, D., Cobb,   S.  (in preparation) Development   of children's  collaborative storytelling  technologies:
         Working with users in schools.
Norman, D. (1999) Invisible Computer, MIT Press.
O'Malley, C. (1992) Designing computer systems to support peer learning, European Journal of Psychology of Education,
         7, 4, 339-352.
Ofsted report (2001) www.ofsted.gov.uk/inspect/index.htm no. 194367
Rogoff, B., Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive Development in Social Context. New York: Oxford University Press,
         1990.
Roschelle, J and Teasley, S.D. (1991) The construction of shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving. In O'Malley
         (Ed) Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Springer Verlag, Berlin. 67- 97.
Ryokai, K. & Cassel, J., Computer Support for Children's Collaborative Fantasy Play and Story Telling, CSCL'99, 1999.
Stanton, D., Bayon, V., Neale, H., Ghali, A., Benford, S., Cobb, S., Ingram, R., Wilson, J., Pridmore, T., & O'Malley, C.
         (2001). Classroom Collaboration in the Design of Tangible Interfaces for Storytelling. In Proceedings of Human
         Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2001) ACM Press, pp. 482-489.
Stanton, D., Abnett, C., Bayon, V., Cobb, S. and O'Malley, C. (In prep). The use of Tangible Interfaces to encourage small
         group physical and social collaboration.
Stanton, D and Neale N. (in prep) Collaborative behaviour around the desktop: The effect of multiple mice on children's
         talk and interaction.
Stewart, J., Raybourn,    E. M., Bederson,   B., &  Druin,  A. (1998).  When    two hands are  better than one:  Enhancing
         collaboration using single display groupware. Paper presented at the Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of Human
         Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'98).
Stewart, J., Bederson, B., & Druin, A. (1999) Single display groupware: A model for co-present collaboration. CHI99 pp.
         287-288, 1999.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                     page 351

Strommen, E., When the interface is a talking dinosaur: Learning across media with Actimates Barney. CHI98 pp. 288-295,
       1998.
Sugimoto, M., Kunsunoki, F., & Hashizume, H. (2000, December 2-6, 2000). Supporting face-to-face group activities with
       a sensor-embedded   board. Paper presented   at the Computer  Supported Cooperative Work,           Philidelphia,
       Pennsylvania
Taxen, G., Druin, A., Fast, C., & Kjellin, M. (2001). KidStory: a technology design partnership with children. Behaviour
       and Information Technology, 20(2), 119-125
Topping, K., Cooperative learning and peer tutoring: An overview. The Psychologist, 5, 151-157, 1992.
Wood, D., & O'Malley, C., Collaborative learning between peers: An overview. Educational Psychology in Practice, 11(4),
       4-9, 1996
