Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page  352

   Literacy Learning by Storytelling with a Virtual Peer
                               Kimiko Ryokai, Catherine Vaucelle, Justine Cassell
                                                 MIT Media Laboratory
                                          [kimiko, cati, justine]@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present Sam, an embodied conversational storyteller who tells stories interactively with children. Sam was
designed to appear as a peer to preschool children, but to tell stories in a developmentally advanced way in order to model
narrative skills important for literacy. Literacy learning - learning how to read and write, begins long before children enter
school. One of the key skills to reading and writing is the ability to represent thoughts symbolically and share them in
language with an audience who does not share the same background. Children learn and practice such important language
skills in the informal setting of everyday storytelling with their peers and adults available around them. In particular,
storytelling in a  context  of peer   collaboration provides a   perfect place    where children not only  learn language   skills
important  for  literacy, but  also learn to be critical listeners of others'  stories. Preliminary  evaluation  showed that by
interacting with Sam, 5-year-old children's stories more closely resembled Sam's linguistically advanced stories with more
quoted speech and temporal and spatial expressions. In addition, the children listened to Sam's stories carefully, assisting
her and giving suggestions on how to improve them. With Sam, children not only learned new linguistic behaviors that are
important for literacy, but also to become critical listeners of other's stories.
Keywords
Literacy learning, storytelling, peer collaboration, virtual peer

INTRODUCTION
While new technologies have been introduced into classrooms to prepare children for computer literacy, traditional literacy
skills ­ the ability to read and write ­ remain critical for children's academic success and may also be aided by advances in
technology and research. The acquisition and practice of skills leading to literacy begin in informal settings of everyday
interactions with adults and peers, and are not isolated to formal, academic environments. In this paper, we address the
specific discourse genre of storytelling as a bridge to literacy. Storytelling occurs in the context of peer play and while a fun
activity for children, also involves emergent literacy activities that can bridge children's competence and knowledge of oral
language with that of written language. We present and discuss a novel approach in supporting children's literacy learning,
where technology is a listener of children's stories and can provide opportunities for children to practice and acquire
linguistic expressions in oral mode that are useful for their later literacy skills. First, we provide background for the link
between    storytelling and literacy, and  the importance  of  social interactions   in literacy learning as children learn new
linguistic skills in interaction with  both  adults  and  peers.  We  will then    introduce Sam,  an embodied    conversational
storyteller who can act as a peer to children in storytelling play, and discuss our preliminary findings with children.

Oral Storytelling and Literacy
Our research is based on the theory of emergent literacy. Emergent literacy theorists view children as "active hypothesis
testers of their language who are in the process of becoming literate" (Teal & Sulzby, 1986). According to this view,
literacy learning does not happen only in formal classroom settings, but also in informal settings, in both oral and written
modes, and in collaboration and interaction with others.
Whitehurst and Lonigan (1998) distinguish between the "inside-out" and "outside-in" skills of literacy. Inside-out skills are
concerned with children's phonological and syntactic awareness, and grapheme-phoneme correspondence, thus facilitating
children's ability to decode information within a sentence. Outside-in skills are concerned with children's ability to take the
meaning of a sentence from the context in which the sentence is placed. Therefore, children must bring in their knowledge
about the world and apply that to the text. Children need both inside-out and outside-in skills for successful literacy
learning. However, with development, the outside-in skills become increasingly important to children, as literacy learning
is concerned more with comprehending text, and not just the decoding of letters in the text (Snow, 1983; Whitehurst &
Lonigan, 1998).
Successful storytelling not only requires children to use decontextualized language, the language that is not bound to the
concrete here and now (Snow, 1983), but it also requires them to "recontexualize" (Cameron & Wang, 1998). In Cameron
and Wang's terms, children must be able to hold the audience's perspective in mind in order to reconstruct the context of a
story in a way that is understandable for the audience. This ability to adopt an audience's perspective in recounting an event
is crucial to literacy (Snow, 1983; Cameron & Wang, 1998). Storytelling, then offers a perfect place for children to practice
such outside-in skills of literacy. Children learn these skills through interaction with both adults and peers.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page   353

Literacy Learning with Adults
Vygotsky defined the zone of proximal development as "the distance between the actual developmental level as determined
by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult
guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers" (Vygotsky, 1978, p.86). According to this theory, a child performs at
a higher developmental level of abstraction and performance with a knowledgeable and skilled partner than he would
achieve individually.
Adults act as the competent partner in emergent literacy activities to support children's literacy learning. With parents and
teachers, children   engage  in  many  different  kinds  of conversations   together:  exchanging  information,   disciplining and
socializing, and showing     feelings. Within    those various  types  of  conversations,  children are  given  opportunities  for
conversations that require syntactic planning, careful lexical selection, making explicit cross-utterance relationships, and
integrating successive utterances into a particular structure (Nelson, 1996). For example, the use of rare words during
parent-child book reading is correlated with children's vocabulary acquisition (Snow, 1993). Dickinson, Cote, and Smith
(1993)  found   that preschool   teachers'   use of rare  words during    meal  time   and in free-play  settings were  positively
correlated with story understanding and definitional quality (such as a cat is a kind of animal) in addition to vocabulary
growth. Therefore, adults' conversations serve as a model for children in learning new ways of using language to express
their thoughts and feelings.

Literacy Learning with Peers
While parents and teachers may not always be available to listen to children's everyday stories, peers are available and can
also offer scaffolding to their co-equal status partners. Neuman and Roskos (1991) investigated how children provide the
kind of   expert-to-novice  scaffolding   adults may   provide  in literacy activities. Neuman    and Roskos   observed   children
engaged   in instructional  conversation   with  their peers ­  designating,    negotiating, and  coaching each   others' literacy
activities. Unlike in an adult-child relationship, children often took turns being the more capable peer according to the
purpose of the play. Similarly, Stone and Christie (1996) found that children engaged in collaborative behaviors to help
each other in literacy activities. In their mixed-age, K-2 classroom, they observed children collaboratively helping each
other by modeling, inviting, assisting, directing, tutoring, negotiating, affirming, and contradicting to each other in literacy
activities. Results from these studies suggest that the combination of literacy-enriched play environments and literacy-rich
older primary-grade children in a mixed age play setting stimulates literacy behaviors. In addition, Christie and Stone
(1999) with their studies of multi-age classrooms have shown that even younger children (supposedly less capable ones)
could offer assistance to older and more capable ones. Therefore, peer interaction involves not just one-way transmission of
knowledge from an expert to a novice, but more "multi-directional" interactions (Christie & Stone, 1999).
It is through dialogue with others in peer collaboration that children come to realize the unique functional potential of the
various symbol systems in their society, including reading and writing (Vygotsky, 1978). In a comparison of collaborative
teacher-child writing  with     collaborative child-child writing,   Daiute  et al.  (1993)  found  that generally, teacher-child
collaboration produced more elaborated classic narrative structure than peer collaboration. However, one pattern of teacher
talk that was controlling was negatively correlated with more elaborative narrative. Peer collaboration did not produce a
more classic narrative structure than teacher-child collaboration, but did produce elaborated narrative texts. Moreover,
engaging in highly interactive peer conversation was positively correlated with the change toward writing in the third
person. Daiute et al. concluded that the nature of social interaction around literacy may be more important than the absolute
expertise of any partner.

RELATED SYSTEMS
Significant improvements in oral reading fluency and other literacy skills have been found with new developments in
technology.   Mostow   et   al. (1994) focused    on inside-out skills  of  literacy  and  developed  a  reading  tutor that gave
appropriate feedback for children reading storybooks out loud. The reading tutor was found to increase oral reading fluency
in children  significantly. In   contrast to  Mostow's   intelligent tutor approach,   the Cognition  and  Technology   Group   at
Vanderbilt used a situated learning approach in developing their Young Children's Literacy series (The Cognition and
Technology Group at Vanderbilt, 1996). In it, anchored video stories challenged children to write a story to save the
animals they saw in the video. Interaction with others was key to literacy learning as the teacher modeled the story writing
activity for the children, and children worked together as a group. The series has produced significant improvements in
children's word and sentence fluency and story complexity.
Our previous story listening system, StoryMat (Ryokai & Cassell, 1999) was a technologically enhanced play mat that
recorded children's oral stories and movements of stuffed animals made on the mat, and played those stories as animations
on the mat when the same or another child told a story at the same place. Through listening to peer stories on StoryMat,
children told more imaginative and structurally advanced stories. Therefore, peer stories became models and through an
opportunity  to listen to  peer  stories, children  told more  sophisticated   stories  than they did alone. Our   previous  story
listening system TellTale (Ananny & Cassell, 2001) recorded pieces of children's stories into the body parts of a plastic
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page 354

caterpillar. Through deciding how to arrange and segment story sequences, children's use of discourse connectives and
story event language improved. These systems led us to questions about the potentially encouraging role of a partner's
feedback on children's stories; for instance, could we foster children's storytelling skills in a way more specifically helpful
for literacy by incorporating a kind of virtual companion who could be a listener of children's stories?
Chan and Baskin (1988) proposed "learning companion systems" which employed both an intelligent tutor and an artificial
student that were both designed to be at about the same level as the student (both were non-embodied agents). The idea was
that a student would learn from an intelligent tutor (in regards to programming LISP), but then was asked to teach the
artificial student (learning companion) what he learned. By having the two tasks ­ learning by being tutored and tutoring,
learning companion systems offer a learning protocol that is similar to "reciprocal teaching" (Palincsar & Brown, 1984)
where   children   take  both the  teacher's   and learner's   role. While    their preliminary results did not show        significant
improvements on problem solving tests, their interviews revealed that the students enjoyed teaching an agent over a real
student because they felt it was like a game.
In the Teachable Agent project (Brophy et al., 1999) children learn ecology by teaching an agent about the subject. Brophy
et al. found that children who studied in order to teach the agent did better on the post test than control children who studied
just for the subject test, as the students who prepared to teach spent time trying to understand "the why" of the studies.
As evident from this literature review, there seems to be an advantage in making technology play a more social role in
supporting children's learning. In literacy learning, such social interactions are important as they serve as opportunities for
children to gain new knowledge about language and communication, and also to test their knowledge about language and
how such knowledge becomes useful.

SAM
Sam is an attempt to have technology play a social role in supporting
young children's literacy learning (Cassell, 2001). The Sam system has
two   components:   Sam,   an   embodied     conversational   agent  (who    is
designed  to look   like a child  around   age 6), and  a toy   castle with  a
figurine. Sam is projected on a screen behind the castle, and can both
listen to a child's  stories  and tell her   own. The  figurine can    exist in
either the physical world or on the screen, so that Sam and the child can
pass it back and forth between their worlds (Cassell et al., 2000). When
a child arrives in front of the toy castle, Sam looks at the child and says,
"Hi,  I'm Sam!"    After the  child greets   Sam,  Sam  tells a story  as  she
moves the figurine around the castle, occasionally looking up to draw
the child in to the story. When Sam finishes her story, she then says,
"I'll put the toy in the magic tower so you can tell a story," and places
the figurine inside the tower. When the child opens the door, she finds
the figurine Sam had been playing with and tells her story. While the
child  does  so, Sam    watches   the  child (following where   the    child is           Figure 1. Sam with her toy castle
moving the figurine with head and eye movements), nodding, smiling,
and prompting, "What happens next?" When the child is done, the child gives the figurine back to Sam and the interaction
continues.
As discussed earlier, children model literacy skills from a competent partner. Sam acts as that partner as she tells stories
using more advanced forms of linguistic expressions (quoted speech, and temporal and spatial information to give enough
information    for the   audience   to reconstruct  the   event).   In interacting   with precocious  Sam   who  tells      stories in
developmentally    more    advanced    forms  than the  child,  the  child   may enter his/her  "zone of  proximal development"
(Vygotsky, 1978). In Vygotsky's term, children develop through their participation in activities that are slightly beyond
their competence, with the assistance of adults or more skilled children. In a way, Sam acts as that more skilled peer who
can push the ability of the child a little further along. Our hypothesis is that by interacting with precocious Sam and
listening to Sam's developmentally advanced stories, children model Sam's linguistic behavior and therefore, perform their
storytelling task in a more developmentally advanced form themselves. Yet, because of Sam's peer-like appearance and the
playful environment with the toy castle, Sam may offer both playful and collaborative activities, more than what an adult
may offer. Our intention is for Sam to provide just the right amount of challenge. Sam's storytelling is more advanced than
the child's, but not too advanced, as he is a partner who is just a head taller than the child.

Technical Implementation
Sam detects a child's presence through a microphone, and a motion detector sensor in front of the castle. When the child is
playing   with the  toys  and  narrating,  the system   uses   audio   threshold detection to  determine  when  to give      feedback
(backchannels such as "uh-huh" nods, and explicit prompts such as "and then what happened next?"). Swatch RFID tag
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page       355

readers are embedded inside of every room in the castle. The tag attached to the figurine tells the system which room in the
castle the figurine is at. A switch in the door tells the system whether the figurine is inside of the magic tower and when the
magic tower door is opened, so that the child will never see the physical and virtual instantiations of the toy simultaneously
(when the door is opened and Sam has the figurine, it disappears instantly and Sam expresses surprise). In order to make
Sam's character believable, Sam's stories and other utterances were recorded from a real child, as the quality of children's
synthesized voices is still poor. The software is written in Java and C++ and can run on a single PC with a graphics
acceleration card. The animation is displayed on a back-projection screen behind the castle.

SAM STUDY
To investigate Sam's role as a competent peer who tells stories using oral language important for literacy, we observed how
children interacted with Sam and how her presence affected a child's use of decontextualized language, compared to
children who played with a human peer partner.
The study was done in a "Wizard of Oz" setting where Sam's response was controlled by a researcher behind the screen.
Thirty-one children volunteered for the study. All children were female and aged 5. Nine children played alone with a castle
without Sam, 10 children played alone with a castle with Sam, 6 children played with a co-present playmate with a castle
but without Sam, and 6 children played with co-present playmate with a castle and with Sam. All children played for
approximately 15 minutes: 5 minutes introduction with an experimenter, and 10 minutes play session on their own. All the
children's 10-minute play sessions were transcribed.

Sam as a Storytelling Partner
Sam's presence as a partner who told stories and invited children to tell their stories engaged both children who played
alone and children who played with a co-present playmate. In taking turns with Sam and listening to Sam's stories, children
seemed to use and explore linguistic expressions important for literacy learning. The following is an example of a child
interacting with Sam:

Ann (age 5) is telling stories with Sam by herself
           SAM:    OK.  Let  me  start.    Today   I'm   going    to  ride   horses    in the  meadow.   My  parents    said      I  could
                   ride  the   big    horse    named   Star.     Oh,   no.   Star  has    been   stolen.   I  better    go  tell       the
                   sheriff.   "Oh,   sheriff,    my   favorite    horse   Star   has   been  stolen   and  I don't   know   where      she
                   is."  "Oh,   no.   No  need   to   worry.    A  kind   old  lady    from  the  other   side   of the   forest       has
                   found  her,   and   she is   just  coming     back  home."  "Yippee!     Thanks.   Come  on,  Star."
           SAM:    I'll  put  the   toy  in  the  magic    tower   so  you  can  tell   a  story.
           ANN:    Once  upon  a  time   there   was  a  little     girl  and  she   went  downstairs.    She  looked   in  the      magic
                   mirror.   She  went   downstairs      and   looked  in  the   mirror.    And  turned   on the  lights,    and       then
                   went  back  up   the  stairs.    And  she    looked  at   her  magic,   and  she  looked   in the  magic       mirror,
                   then  went  back    downstairs,     and   there   was  her  mom   and   dad.  The  end.  Your  turn   to  tell      the
                   story.
           SAM:    Cool!  OK,  let   me  start.   I'm    going   to  have  a  party  and   I'm  going  to  invite   whoever       I  want.
                   My  mom,  the    queen  said   I  could.    Oh   look!  Here   Chris   comes.   I'm  going   downstairs        to   meet
                   him.  "Hi  Chris,    you're   the   first    one  here.   What  do   you  want  to  do?"  "Well,   we  can       go ask
                   the  mirror,     who is   going    to come    to  your  party?"     "Oh  yeah.   Oh,  mirror,    who is   going       to
                   come  to  my  party?"     "Oh,   people     from  all   the   way   over  the  land."   "Oh   yeah.  Here,       I  see
                   Cheryl,   Brad,   and   Sean.   Oh,   this   is  going   to  be   a great   party."   I'll  put   the  toy      in  the
                   magic  tower   so   you can   tell  a   story.
           ANN:    Once  upon  a  time,    there   was   a  little   girl  who   wanted    her  mommy  and   poppy,  but  she       didn't
                   have  one  so  she   could   do  anything     she  wanted.    She hopped    downstairs    and then   she  saw       the,
                   she  went  upstairs     and   told    the   magic   mirror  that    she  wanted   a  mama  and   papa.   The      magic
                   mirror   told    her  that   she   couldn't     get   one.  So  she    went   back  downstairs    and   she      saw   a
                   monster.   She   went   back   upstairs     to  the  magic  mirror     and  said,  "Magic   mirror,   why      there's
                   a monster?"    and   she  went   back   downstairs    and  there    wasn't   a monster   anymore.    The end!
In the example above, Ann took turns with Sam, listened to Sam's
stories, and  in  that process,  her   stories  seemed   to  become    more
sophisticated. In her first turn, Ann's sentences involved very little
complexity.   Her  speech  was   almost   an eventcast   (i.e. the  form  of
"then she did this, and then she did that...") rather than a story with
a causal connection between clauses (Labov, 1972).
Sam's    stories were  created   to involve    complicating    actions (e.g.
losing   a horse) and  resolution   of  stories (e.g. finding   the  horse).
They also modeled advanced language, such as relative clauses
(e.g. the big horse named Star), quoted speech (e.g. "Oh, sheriff..."),
temporal    expressions  (e.g.   today   I'm    going  to...), and   spatial
expressions (e.g. a kind old lady from the other side of the forest).
After  hearing   Sam's  stories, Ann    used   more   literate expressions,
                                                                                       Figure 2. A child telling stories with Sam
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                 page 356

such as relative clauses (e.g. "a little girl who wanted her mommy and poppy") and quoted speech (e.g. "she said, `Magic
mirror...'").
Two researchers coded together the occurrence of spatial expressions, temporal expressions, and quoted speech in the
children's stories. Following Peterson, Jesso, and McCabe (1999), spatial expression was coded as definite information
about where the event took place (e.g. "then the boy went to the kitchen") and temporal expression as explicit information
about when the event took place (e.g. "he went downstairs when
he heard the noise"). For the quoted speech, we coded for both
direct speech    with  a framing  clause  (e.g. then  she  said, "Oh              0.07
no!")  and  indirect   speech   such  as "he  said  that   he wasn't              0.06
hungry" (Hickmann, 1993). The occurrences were tallied, andthe numbers were then analyzed with respect to the time each0.05
child had to tell her story.                                                      0.04
The presence of Sam dramatically increased the frequency with                     0.03
which    children used   quoted  speech  and  temporal   and  spatial             0.02
expressions.   Figure    3 shows  the   mean    frequency   (tally of
occurrences of expressions by each child / total time that child                  0.01
spent speaking) of spatial expression across the four conditions.                   0
Thus, for the dyads, the bar represents the mean frequency for                           one      one        dyad       dyad
each of the children in dyads. A full-factorial ANOVA revealed                           child   child       w ith    w ithout
a main effect due to the presence or absence of Sam, F(3, 24) =                          w ith  w ithout     Sam        Sam
68.04, p<.01. There was no main effect for number of children                            Sam     Sam
(the  one child   vs.  the  dyad  condition),   nor were   there   any
interactions.    Children    used    significantly   more     spatial
expressions when playing with Sam than they did alone, or with             Figure 3. Mean frequency (tally of occurrences / total
another   child.  Findings   were equally   significant  for  quoted       time) of spatial information
speech (F(3, 24)=10.58, p<.01) and temporal expressions (F(3,
24) = 30.52, p<.01). The children in the "dyad with Sam" condition had equally high frequencies of quoted speech and
temporal and spatial expressions as in the "one child with Sam" condition. This suggests that Sam succeeds in evoking
literate behaviors even in the presence of a real flesh-and-blood playmate.
Was children's use of literate expressions attributable to the fact that Sam
modeled these behaviors? In order to examine this question, we looked at                     7
whether the literate expressions increased over the course of the interaction
with Sam. Remember that as the children took turns with Sam, every one of                    6
their  stories was  preceded    and   followed  by  a  story  by   Sam.   Figure   4illustrates the mean number of spatial expressions per story produced by the5
children in the "one child with Sam" condition. The figure illustrates the                   4
increased amount of spatial expressions as the children tell their stories with
Sam: the first story contained a relatively low number of spatial expressions,               3
yet the number doubles and triples over the course of a child's interactions
with   Sam.    The  Pearson     product-moment      correlation  test  revealed    a         2
significant   positive   correlation between    the chronology     of  stories    and        1
occurrence of spatial expression, r=.35, p<.05, and of quoted speech (r=.27,
p<.06).  No    significant  correlation  was  found    for temporal    expressions           0
(r=.065). Interestingly, however, if one looks only at the first three stories,
the use of temporal expressions does increase significantly over the stories.
This suggests that children may have become tired after the third interaction,
and   no longer   were able  to push  their linguistic behavior    to its limits. Of
course, a future study will investigate children's interaction with Sam over a           Figure 4. Mean number of spatial
longer term, as observation of stable linguistic improvements may require                expressions per story
more than a few storytelling turns with Sam.
Unlike the children who played with Sam, children who played with another child without Sam treated each other as
conversational partners rather than taking turns being the storyteller and the story listener. In the example below, the two
children engage in fantasy/pretend play (i.e. the two children seem to be pretending to be at a house with a ghost) and talk
to each other as a character in their play. As the two children are engaging in a conversation, rather than storytelling, their
speech is more dependent upon contextual cues. For example, the child did not introduce or explain what "this" was in the
utterance "You broke this..." because the referred item was immediately shared with her partner and in their conversation:
                                                                                                  story1
                                                                                                            story2
                                                                                                                      story3
                                                                                                                                story4
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  357

        Wendy   and Sarah    (both  age   5) are   playing  without    Sam
        Wendy:      You  broke   this  after   I  had  fixed  it.
        Sarah:      Not  me.
        Wendy:      It's  probably    the  ghost.
        Sarah:      There's     no  such   thing    as   monsters.   Did   that    door    just  open,   or   was   it  just   my
                    imagination?
        Wendy:      It was   just   your  imagination.
        Sarah:      No.  I think    it was   just  the  wind.  I'm  having   nightmares.
        Wendy:      Me,  too.
        Sarah:      I want   to  sleep.   I  want  to  sleep.  I  hope  I  am.
The children who played with Sam also shared the physical context with Sam (e.g. sharing the castle). However, Sam
explicitly invited the children to tell stories and modeled decontextualized storytelling behavior. Further, because Sam's
method of narration did not rely on contextual cues, the children's narration also became less context-dependent. In a way,
the children and Sam shared the same invisible audience. Therefore, Sam's presence as a partner who took turns with
children and told stories using diverse linguistic expressions appears to have been important in making the stories more
sophisticated, fostering children's use of linguistic expressions in storytelling.

Sam as a Peer
Children seemed to perceive Sam as a co-storyteller and collaborator, as demonstrated below:

        Ann  (age  5)  is  playing    alone  with   Sam.  Sam  finishes   her  story    and  gives  the  turn  to  Ann.
        SAM:    I'll   put   the toy   in the   magic  tower  so  you  can  tell   a  story.
        ANN:    Once   upon   a  time  there    was  a  little  girl   and  she    went  downstairs.    [eye  gaze  at   the  toy
                she   is  telling    her  story    with]  She  looked   in  the    magic  mirror.   She  went   downstairs    and
                looked    in the   mirror.   And   turned  on the   lights,   and   then  went   back up  the  stairs.   And  she
                looked    at  her  magic.    And  she  looked   in  the  magic  mirror,     then  went  back   downstairs,    and
                there   was  her   mom  and  dad.  The   end. Your  turn   to  tell   the  story.  [gaze   back  at Sam]
Once Ann finished her story, she acknowledged Sam's turn by looking at Sam and saying, "Your turn to tell the story."
Then Ann put the toy back to the magic tower for Sam to take it away. Many children acknowledged Sam's turn by giving
similar "Your turn!" acknowledgement. When things were not clear, as in the following example, children seemed to "ask"
Sam questions as if to check if Sam was OK:

        Simone   (age  5)  is   playing   alone  with   Sam.
        SAM:     Cool!    OK,   my  turn.    Today   I'm  going  to   ride   horses    in   the  meadow.   [...]   She  is   just
                 coming    back  now.  Whee!   Thanks.   Come  on,  Star.   [pause]
        SIMONE: You    done,  Sam?   OK.
        SAM:     I'll   put  the   toy in   the  magic  tower  so  you  can  tell   a  story.
        SIMONE: What    should   I  tell,   Sam?  Do  you have   an idea?   [gaze   Sam]   Hmmmm.[gaze   away]
        SAM:     Tell   me what    happens   next.
        SIMONE: Oh,    the girl    was happy.[...]
Simone seemed to regard Sam as a storytelling partner. So, when Sam finished her story, and did not immediately give up
her turn, Simone asked Sam, "You done, Sam?" before she took her turn. Simone also seemed to consider Sam as a fellow
collaborator. When Simone was thinking about what to tell, she looked at Sam and asked, "What should I tell, Sam? Do
you have an idea?" Then, she gazed away while she thought about what to tell, a behavior one might observe from two real
peers. Although we did not quantify eye gaze patterns used by children in the study, our observation leads us to believe that
children looked back-and-forth from Sam to the castle in similar ways as they did when they were playing with another
child. And, in fact, even with a co-present playmate, children seemed to take Sam into account. The following is an
example from two children playing with Sam:
        Amy  and  Beth    (both  age   5)  are  playing   together   with   Sam.    Beth  has   already  told   her story.    Now
        Amy  is  telling   her   story.

        AMY:     And   she   ran   upstairs.    And  she  ran  upstairs    again.     So,  they  didn't   find  her.   And   then
                 they    were   surprised    that   it  was  all   messed   up.    And  they  didn't   even   know  who   it  was
                 from.    So,  then,   she   came  back  down.   And  they  said,     Annabelle.   Did  you  do  this?   And  she
                 said,   no.  And   she  was  lying.
        BETH:    So,   her nose    went  big?
        AMY:     So,   then,  the   mother   and  father  put  her  bed.
        BETH:    Because   she   lied?
        AMY:     Because   she   lied,   and  because   she  wasn't  supposed      to do  that.
        BETH:    OK.   My  turn.
        AMY:     Sammy.    I want   Sammy   to  do  it.  I'll put   it back.   [Amy    puts  the toy  in  the  magic   tower  for
                 Sam   to  take  her   turn]
The two children seemed to collaboratively tell a story. While Amy is the main storyteller, Beth scaffolded Amy by giving
some ideas (e.g. "What about Anna?" "Because she lied?"). When Amy finished, Beth tried to take the turn. However, Amy
turned things over to Sam.. Thus, even with a co-present playmate, the children seemed to take Sam into account. In
everyday storytelling, children become collaborators and facilitators of peer narrations (Preece, 1992). Thinking about
Sam's turn and acknowledging Sam's role as a fellow collaborator is similar to what children go through with peers in
everyday collaborative storytelling. Literacy learning is more profound in situations where children assist each other or
collaboratively engage in activities than it is in parallel or solitary behaviors (Stone & Christie, 1996). In our experiments,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page 358

Sam seemed to play the role of an engaging peer, and was thus able to elicit linguistic behaviors predictive of future
literacy.

Children Coaching Sam
Children not only seemed to regard Sam as a storytelling partner to model, but also as a peer to coach. We did not design
Sam to be a character that explicitly elicited help from children. However, in interaction with Sam, children spontaneously
helped Sam. The following is an example of a child "coaching" Sam:
          Jane  (age   5)    is playing    alone  with   Sam.
          SAM:       Now  what    happens?
          CHILD:     It's    like  this.   Now  it's   a  girl.  Hi.  [...]    The  End.  Now  it's  your  turn.
          SAM:       Cool.    OK,  my  turn.   One   day  me  and  my  friend[...]     I'll  put  the  toy in  the   magic  tower  so
                     you  can    tell  a story.
          JANE:      [talking     to  Sam]   Try  to  make   a  longer   story    next  time.   It's  like  this.  The   little   boy
                     was  outside.      He flipped    all   around  and  he    went  inside,   he did  a  flip,  [...]   He  went  to
                     sleep.     That's  the  end!
Jane told a long story before Sam took her turn. After listening to Sam's story, Jane went on to model what she was looking
for. "It's like this," she told Sam and then told her own, longer story, thereby coaching and modeling for Sam how to be a
better storyteller.
The following is another example of a child correcting Sam:
          Ann  (age    5)    is  playing    alone    with   Sam.   Sam  tells     a  story   which  Ann   has  heard   before.    Ann
          interrupts    Sam    and  comments   that   Sam   has already   told    that  story  before.
          SAM:      OK.  My   turn.   I  love  dancing    with  the   music.   [...]   They  said  that  the  lady   from  the other
                    side  of    the forest   was  going    to  come,  but  she   didn't   show  up.
          ANN:      You  already    told   that   story!
          SAM:      So,  many    people   until   my parents    said  I  have   to  go  to bed.
          ANN:      Sam!
          SAM:      I could     have  danced   all  night.   When   I grow  up,    I'm  going
          ANN:      Sam,  you    already   told   that   story.  You  can  still    tell  it  though.  Go  ahead.  [pause]
          SAM:      I'll  put    the  toy  in  the  magic   tower   so you  can    tell  a story.
          ANN:      OK.  Let's    see.   [pause]
          SAM:      Why  don't    you  tell  me   a story?
          ANN:      Just  a   minute,    Sam.
Ann listened carefully to Sam's story and commented that Sam had already told the story before. Ann was acting as a
corrector of Sam's storytelling, but did so politely, allowing Sam to finish her story. In everyday storytelling, children
become    not only   collaborators    and  facilitators, but  also active critics   and correctors  of peer  stories (Preece,  1992).
Accordingly, Jane and Ann became critics and correctors of Sam's storytelling. Sam seemed to act as a co-storyteller, but
also a peer the children felt responsible to critic and coach. By coaching, peers provide substantive input to one another's
learning (Cazden, 1988; Rogoff, 1990; Neuman & Roskos, 1991). Therefore, children's interaction with Sam both as co-
storyteller and as    critic may   contribute  to them    becoming    critical thinkers who   could  evaluate and  challenge   others'
linguistic behaviors.

Limitations
Sam's current response behavior is fairly limited. Sam was able to elicit collaborative behaviors from children, but could
not follow up on the children's collaborative behaviors. For example, Sam did respond to a child's story by saying "Cool!"
However, Sam was not able to give any specific feedback that related to the child's story. Somewhat surprisingly, given
Sam's quite limited collaborative behavior, children still took Sam as a peer and continued to engage in collaborative
behavior with Sam. We are currently investigating how Sam could relate to and incorporate children's story elements into
her own stories through the use of keyword recognition techniques.
The scope of the study was limited in that it included only 5-year-old girls. Would interactions with Sam and her toy castle
be engaging for both girls and boys? To children of what age range could this type of storytelling play be engaging and
effective? We are designing Sam and her toys and stories to appeal to both girls and boys for our future study, as well as the
age range appropriate for such an interface.
Finally, the children in the study played only once with Sam. However, in order to establish a longitudinal study, Sam's
interaction with children needs to evolve over time. For example, Sam cannot simply greet "Hi, I'm Sam!" every time a
child plays with her. How could Sam establish a long term relationship? Can Sam be a friend to a child? A study has shown
that friends, compared to non-friends, resolved more conflicts and performed better at emergent literacy activities during
pretend play (Pellegrini et al., 1998). We plan to investigate the kind of interactions and relationships Sam could have with
children over a longer term.

FUTURE WORK
We are currently developing Sam in two directions: 1) designing Sam's stories with more precise features of outside-in
literacy skills and 2) enhancing Sam's interactivity.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 359

In order to more precisely model outside-in literacy skills, Sam's new stories will involve more decontextualized language
(e.g. spatial and temporal information of stories), and perspective taking. A recent study has shown that children's ability to
take multiple perspectives in storytelling is positively correlated with their mathematical skills (O'Neill & Pearce, 2001).
We believe Sam could model such perspective taking by introducing and maintaining different characters in her stories. To
encourage such perspective taking, we have also incorporated multiple figurines so that Sam and children can tell stories
with multiple perspectives using the figurines.
In order to increase Sam's interactivity, we are investigating keyword spotting speech recognition technology. In addition
to speech input, Sam's toy castle is being enhanced with more sensors to follow movements children make while they are
narrating. For example, movement of furniture in the castle while children tell their story will be cues for Sam to give
feedback to their actions. Finally, in order for Sam to produce the positive effect of multi-age collaboration where children
learn by both modeling and coaching their peer (Christie & Stone, 1999), we need to have a more explicit model of a peer
who could both teach and be criticized. Currently, we are investigating behavioral features of Sam that invite constructive
criticism. With a more explicit model of Sam as a peer, we plan to further investigate children's literacy learning with Sam.

DISCUSSION
In summary, Sam became a partner for children to model their own stories after, as well as a peer in need of didactic
coaching. The role of the "more capable partner" in the Vygotskian sense, changed fluidly between Sam and her human
playmate, just like it does between real peers. This type of role change resembles a reciprocal model of peer assistance
where children take  both the teacher's   and   student's roles (Palincsar  & Brown,  1984;   Cazden, 1988), beneficial for
collaborative learning in general.
Most  importantly, Sam was  able    to model  linguistic  behaviors crucial for literacy. By taking turns with Sam and  by
listening to Sam's stories, the children's stories became more sophisticated and explicit through the use of quoted speech
and spatial and temporal expressions. As such, children learned and practiced ways to gear their text more sensitively to an
audience, which is one of keys to literacy learning.
By listening to Sam's stories and having Sam as their listener, children became both active learners and critics of others'
stories. Unlike in traditional CSCL, where computers are enlisted to support learning between a teacher and pupils or to
support collaborative learning between pupils, this work explored the role of computers as participants in collaborative
learning. This work contributes to the field of CSCL as it illustrates how computers could play a more social role in
supporting young children's literacy learning in familiar environments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all the children who participated in the study, Thompson School, Vicky Rose, Linda Lin, Elisabeth Sylvan, Dona
Tversky, Stefan Marti, Ian Gouldstone, Schuyler Horton, and the members of the Gesture and Narrative Language group at
the MIT Media Lab.

REFERENCES
Ananny, M. and J. Cassell (2001). Telling Tales: A new toy for encouraging written literacy through oral storytelling.
       Society for Research in Child Development biennial meeting, Minneapolis, MN.
Brophy, S., Biswas, G., Katzlberger, T., Bransford, J. & Schwartz, D. (1999). Teachable Agents: Combining Insights from
       Learning Theory and Computer Science. In S. P. Lajoie and M. Vivet (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence in Education.
       vol. 50, pp. 21-28. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Cameron, C. & Wang, M. (1999). Frog, Where Are You? Children's narrative expression over the telephone. Discourse
       Processes, 28, 217-236.
Cassell, J (2001). "Towards a Model of Technology and Literacy Development: Story Listening Systems." Tech Report
       ML-GNL-01-1.
Cassell, J., M. Ananny, Basu, A., Bickmore, T., Chong, P., Mellis, D., Ryokai, K., Smith, J., Vilhjálmsson, H., & Yan, H.
       (2000). Shared Reality: Physical Collaboration with a Virtual Peer. In Proceedings of CHI 2000.
Cazden, C. (1988). Classroom discourse. Portsmouth: Heinemann.
Chan, T-W & Baskin, A. (1988). Studying with the Prince: The Computer as a Learning Companion, Int'l Conference on
       ITS.
Christie, J. & Stone, S. (1999). Collaborative literacy activity in print-enriched play centers: Exploring the "zone" in same-
       age and multi-age groupings. Journal of Literacy Research, 31, 2, 109-131.
The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1996). A multimedia literacy series that celebrates authorship and
       books. Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) on Learner-Centered Design, 39 (8),
       106-109.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page  360

Daiute, C., Campbell, C.H., Griffin, T.M., Reddy, M. & Tivnan, T. (1993). Young authors' interactions with peers and a
        teacher: Toward a developmentally sensitive sociaocultural literacy theory. In Daiute (Ed.) The development of
        literacy through social interaction. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Dickinson, D.K., Cote, L.R. & Smith, M.W. (1993). Learning vocabulary in preschool: Social and discourse contexts
        affecting vocabulary  growth. In W.      Damon  (Series  Ed.)  &  C.  Daiute (Vol. Ed.),  New directions  in child
        development: Vol. 61. The development of literacy through social interaction (pp. 67-78). San Francisco, CA:
        Jossey-Bass.
Hickmann, M. (1993). The boundaries of reported speech in narrative discourse: some developmental aspects. In John-
        Arthur, L. (Ed.) Reflexive language: Reported speech and metapragmatics, New York, NY: Cambridge University
        Press, pp.63-90.
Labov, W. (1972). The logic of non-standard English, Language in the Inner City: Studies in the Black English Vernacular
        (pp.201-240). Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Mostow, J., Roth, S., Hauptmann, A.G. & Kane, M. (1994). A prototype reading coach that listens, Proceeding of the
        Twelfth   National Conference on  Artificial   Intelligence, August  1994   (pp.785-792), Seattle, WA:   American
        Association for Artificial Intelligence.
Nelson, K. (1996). Language in Cognitive Development. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Neuman & Roskos (1991). Peers as literacy informants: A description of young children's literacy conversations in play.
        Early childhood research quarterly, 6, 233-248.
O'Neill, D. & Pearce, M. (2001). A new perspective on the predictive relation between narrative perspective-taking ability
        in preschoolers and academic competence, (under review).
Palincsar, A.S. & Brown, A.L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension monitoring
        activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Pellegrini, A.D., Galda, L., Bartini, M. & Charak, D. (1998). Oral language and literacy learning in context: The role of
        social relationships. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 44, 1, 38-54.
Preece, A. (1992). Collaborators and  Critics:   The nature  and effects  of peer interaction on  children's conversational
        narratives. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 2, 3, 277-292.
Ryokai, K. & Cassell, J. (1999). Computer support for children's collaborative fantasy play and storytelling. In Proceedings
        of Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, 1999, pp.510-517.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York: Oxford University
        Press.
Snow, C.E. (1983). Literacy and Language: Relationships during the Preschool Years, Harvard Educational Review, 53, 2,
        165-189.
Snow, C.E. (1993). Families as social contexts for literacy development. In Daiute (Ed.) The development of literacy
        through social interaction. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Snow, C.E., Tabors, P.O., Nicholson, P.A. & Kurland, B.F. (1995). SHELL: Oral language and early literacy skills in
        kindergarten and first-grade children. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 10, 1, 37-48.
Stone, S.J. & Christie, J.F. (1996). Collaborative literacy learning during sociodramatic play in a multiage (K-2) primary
        classroom. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 10, 2, 123-133.
Teale, W.H. & Sulzby, E. (1986). Emergent Literacy: Writing and reading. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
        Press.
Whitehurst, G.J. & Longian, C.J. (1998). Child development and emergent literacy. Child Development, 69, 848-872.
