Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page   361

    A Two-tiered Collaborative Design for Observational
             Science Activities in Simulated Environments
                                      Tom Moher, Janet Kim, David Haas
                                         Electronic Visualization Laboratory
                                           University of Illinois at Chicago
                                                           moher@uic.edu

ABSTRACT
Elementary   school science focuses   on   the early phases      of  science  inquiry:   observation, description,   data collection,
reflection, and reporting. Technologies afford opportunities to scaffold and extend the domains of inquiry, but successful
adoption depends on their integration with classroom organization and practice. In elementary schools, small group and
whole class activities dominate over solitary activity, and the effective use of traditional desktop computer systems has
proven to be a difficult challenge for classroom teachers. Increasingly affordable large-format displays more naturally
support small-group collaboration, but require careful activity design to maximize utility. We describe an activity design
employing large displays that accommodates both the constraints of the classroom and the play experiences of children in
support of observational science learning.

Keywords
Collaboration, science inquiry, large-format displays, elementary school

THE SNOOKERPUSS ADVENTURE
In Mr. Baez's fourth grade classroom, the talk was of the Snookerpuss, and whether there would be enough mushrooms--
the Snookerpuss's favorite cuisine--to satisfy his ravenous appetite when he came out of hibernation*. In order to make
their prediction, small groups of Mr. Baez's students had been conducting crop surveys in a large field and counting
mushrooms    during successive   months  of the   growing      season.   Plotting their  collective data on  a   graph and  visually
introducing a best-fit line, they developed a prediction of the number of mushrooms that would be available at the end of
his hibernation. They confirmed their favorable prediction by sneaking into the field for a final count just before the hungry
Snookerpuss awoke.
When they did their surveys, the children noticed that the field they were exploring contained different types of terrain
(rock, sand, and grass). As they inventoried the mushrooms, the children took note of the underlying terrain, and later
developed  separate graph  lines for  each  type. Concluding        that the  mushrooms    grew  most    rapidly  in the  grass, they
recommended that next year the mushroom spores be distributed in grassy areas to maximize yield.
In follow-up individual  activities, the children   described      their surveying  strategies, and   developed   new  Snookerpuss
predictions based on hypothetical data. Although the children had not previously been introduced to linear extrapolation,
75% of the students were able to construct a supported prediction. The next month, when the kids were formally introduced
to the concepts of linear interpolation and extrapolation in their math textbooks, they repeatedly cited the Snookerpuss
adventure.
The Snookerpuss Adventure took place over two rainy days in November 2000. The children were working in a simulated
environment called "the Field," presented on a large-format multi-user display located in a resource room at their school.
Kids "walked around" in small groups, navigating the simulated space and recording tallies, conditioned by terrain type. In
a whole-class setting prior to the exploration, they had been introduced to the Snookerpuss's needs, and had discussed how
they might be able to make predictions of future events based on historical data. The aggregation and plotting of the data,
and the ensuing curve fitting and extrapolated prediction, was likewise a whole-class exercise. Overall, each child spent
about 30 minutes using the display technology, and about two hours in small group and whole-class activities.

VIRTUAL AMBIENTS
The field  used in  the Snookerpuss   Adventure   is       an example    of a virtual ambient   (Moher,  et. al., 2000,   2001)   --a
configurable simulated  environment   used  as  the  locus     for children's scientific exploration.  Virtual ambients   are three-
dimensional "first person" spaces within which users may navigate in space, scale, and time. Virtual ambients may be static
or dynamic, but unlike traditional simulations, virtual ambients offer users no direct control over independent variables;
they are designed to support observational, rather than experimental, sciences (AAAS, 1993; NCTM, 1998; NRC, 1996).
Nothing that the user may do within a virtual ambient can affect the course of the underlying simulation. This constraint is

* The Snookerpuss's second favorite food is fourth graders
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  362

designed to reduce the cognitive burden of exploring complex input spaces (de Jong et. al, 1998; Friedler et. al, 1990;
Jackson, et. al, 1994) by limiting young learners to familiar concepts and activities: moving around, seeing things at
different scales,  and  imagining   the past and future. It does  not  preclude the articulation and investigation of causal
hypotheses;   it simply  shifts the burden   from artificially manipulating preconditions to   finding instances  of varying
preconditions in space or time.
Virtual ambients are intended as complements to, rather than substitutes for, accessible physical phenomena. Teachers often
rely on accessible local environments to stimulate young learners' questions and to provide direct access to observable and
measurable phenomena. Local environments have the advantages of convenience and salience, but they also have important
limitations: they may emphasize activity over learning (Dewey, 1910), they may limit the domain of inquiry, and, at least in
natural environments, they may constrain teachers' ability to scaffold learning by reducing complexity.
Activities employing virtual ambients typically address complementary learning goals. In the case of the Snookerpuss
adventure, one goal was to help the children develop their understanding of transforming between numeric and graphical
representations of data, linear best-fit, interpolation, and extrapolation. The other goal was to develop students' skills for
conducting scientific inquiry, including planful investigation, navigational strategies within a survey space, observation of
phenomena and recording of data, distribution of effort within an investigational team, reporting of their results, and the
aggregation of data across teams in a large-scale project.
Virtual ambients share a motivational base with field- and video-based classroom investigation technologies in their focus
on children's direct observations of phenomena (Smith & Reiser, 1998; Soloway et. al, 1999). Like video, virtual ambients
benefit from their ability to focus attention to a manageable data domain; like field-based activities, they allow learners
latitude in observational choices and practices.
In our work   to  date, we have   deployed   our virtual ambients   on large-format displays (Figure 1). In  the case of  the
Snookerpuss Adventure, students used an ImmersaDesk®, a 1.27m by 1.7m rear-projected video system with head- and
hand-tracking employing lightweight shutter glasses to present a stereoscopic display, situated in a resource room at a local
elementary school.

Figure 1. Children using virtual ambients deployed on an ImmersaDesk in school resource room

ACTIVITY DESIGN
The use of large format displays for presenting virtual ambients has facilitated activity designs involving groups of children
engaged in collaborative investigations. Our motivation for these designs draws from several sources:
    ·     The organization  of   activity--and  even the   physical layout of   classrooms--in   elementary schools  is most
       frequently designed to support small group interaction. Moreover, from both logistic and economic perspectives, it
       is simply impractical to effectively schedule individual access to very scarce technological resources.
    ·     Many children have substantial experience outside of school in collaborative virtual environments presented on
       large displays; the image of several children sitting cross-legged in front of a 32" television exploring complex
       video-game worlds for hours on end has become a cultural touch point for parents.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page  363

   ·     Finally, we share the perspective that learning in a social context affords opportunities simply unavailable to the
         solitary learner.
   ·     The large display enhances the children's sense of "immersion" in the virtual environment, and provides a closer
         approximation to the wide field-of-view available to learners in the natural world.
   ·     Prior research supports the conjecture that peer collaboration plays a significant role with respect to the level of
         student engagement within virtual learning environments (Jackson, et. al., 1999).
A commitment to collaborative organization still leaves considerable latitude in the design of learning activities. Working
with teachers at a local elementary school over the course of the past two academic years, we have developed a two-tiered
approach that interleaves whole class and small group collaborative activities. A typical lesson trajectory, normally enacted
over the course of a few days or weeks, includes the following components.
Reconnaissance. In order to enhance the students' ownership in the virtual environment, units typically begin with the
selection of a small group "scouting party" whose responsibility is to make a brief visit to the environment, make initial
observations and take some notes on what they saw, take some simulated "snapshots" of scenes in the environment, and
then report what they found back to the whole class.
Establishing challenge/task/question. After the scouts describe what they saw, a research question is established in a whole
class setting. The   setting  of the research   question    is a delicate  balance between  curricular     goals and self-motivated
children's inquiry. In some cases, features of the environment may lead children to raise questions consistent with the
curricular goals; in other cases, the teacher may lead the children to a question by referencing environmental features that
the scouts reported.
Operational planning. Once a research question is established, the teacher and students, again in a whole class setting,
engage in an extended planning discussion in preparation for exploration in the virtual environment. Among the issued
discussed are what data need to be collected in order to address the question (and the design of the data collection forms),
how labor will be divided among the class to accomplish data collection, how accuracy in data collection can be enhanced,
and the roles of individual team members during the exploration process. Data attributes in our studies have included such
features as cardinality, shape, size, color, location (both coordinate data using a handheld device as a simulated GPS
display, and   categorically   with respect to  environmental     attributes), and motion/gesture    of animate   characters in  the
environment.
Data  collection. As    the   simulation environment     is a  single  resource, data  collection is accomplished     serially, with
individual exploration     groups collecting    the data assigned     to them  during  operational   planning.   Depending   on  the
technology,  this may      be achieved   either through     pull-outs (to access  the  ImmersaDesk      in the   resource room),  or
opportunistically planned by the teacher directly in the classroom (in the case of the plasma display).
Data investigation. Once all of the exploration groups have collected their data, the data are explored in small-group and
whole class settings. Individual groups may initially work with their own data, but the data are compared among groups or
aggregated across groups. In our studies, students have identified location- and time-based patterns, performed best-fit
regression on  time  series   data, developed   conditional    co-occurrence   rules, and constructed   and  compared     categorical
distributions, among other activities.
Reporting. The unit is concluded by a reporting activity in which the students, either individually or in small groups, or as a
whole class, develop an intellectual product that reflects both the process they undertook and the conclusions that they
reached as a result of the investigation. This has taken the form of individual reports, group enactments, and whole class
posters in our studies.
While the lesson trajectory is presented as linear, in practice it is often the case that activities undertaken at one phase may
require backtracking to earlier phases of the investigation, in some cases to correct errors or resolve discrepancies, but also
to undertake entirely new investigations based on accumulated experience.

COLLABORATION IN THE SNOOKERPUSS ADVENTURE
The Field
In the Field (Figure 2), students collaboratively explore a large (3000m x 3000m) "natural" terrain populated by up to eight
different plant types. A standalone Java application allows the Field to be configured by selecting a plant type and clicking
on the desired location. The Field itself has limited affordances: navigation, the ability to take "snapshots" automatically
posted to a class web page, and the ability to plant an unlimited number of (biodegradable) "flags" in the ground. In the
Field, the land mass is statically divided into regions in two independent ways: by the 3x3 orthogonal arrangement imposed
by the picket fences ("sectors"), and by the differential texture maps (grass, gravel, sand) used on the ground ("terrain"). A
standalone Java application allows the Field to be configured by selecting plant types and clicking on the desired locations,
supporting learning objectives across a range of grade levels without requiring additional software development.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page   364

                                  Figure 2. A mushroom in a rocky region of the Field.
In the Snookerpuss Adventure, we used only one of the nine regions, and created eight different configurations populated
by varying numbers of mushrooms reflecting a time series over eight simulated months during the growing season. In the
rocky portion of the field, the number of plants was held constant over the time series. In the sandy and grassy portions of
the field, the number of plants grew as a linear function of time (Figure 3). The simulation for the month of June was
intentionally excluded in order to create an opportunity to discuss linear interpolation.
                                          Month      Rock      Sand   Grass    Total
                                          March        5        5       5       15
                                           April       5        6       7       18
                                           May         5        7       9       21
                                           July        5        9       13      27
                                         August        5        10      15      30
                                        September      5        11      17      33
                                         October       5        12      19      36
                     Figure 3: Actual configuration of mushrooms by terrain type per month.
(The decision to use "perfect" data values in configuring the field drew from our experience with virtual ambient activities
at other grade levels (Moher et. al, 2000). In prior activities, we had intentionally introduced noise into the data in an effort
to move children away from the expectation that everything always comes out "right" in elementary school math and
science. However, we found that the counting tasks in the virtual ambients were of sufficient difficulty that exploration
groups almost never counted completely     accurately; we  also   found that their errors   included both undercounting and
overcounting. Rather than introduce arbitrary "noise" into the data and risk further aggravating the children's own counting
errors, we have settled on a strategy of using model values.)
Tier 1: Small-group collaboration
In the Snookerpuss  Adventure,    there were two   types of   small-group  activities: scouting  (open-ended reconnaissance
enacted by a group of four students at the outset of the unit) and data collection (mushroom counting enacted by seven
groups of two or three students during different simulated months).
The charge for the scouts was simply to explore the field and report back to their classmates; scouting was done prior to
establishing the Snookerpuss scenario. The children took notes (Figure 4), and also took simulated photographs of scenes in
the field that were assembled into a slide-show presentation that the children showed to the whole class using a video
projector. Scouting took approximately 40 minutes.
The scouts collected information describing both the environment and the interface affordances (and limitations) of the
system. They noted the different terrain types and the presence of the mushrooms and some ancillary plants. They also
discovered that pushing one of the buttons on the controller caused a flag to be planted in the proximity of their position.
They were intrigued by a software fault that caused them to get "stuck" in one portion of the field.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 365

The students negotiated their own roles during the scouting activity. One student was the "driver," operating the controller
that moved them around the field. A second student was the "photographer," deciding when to take snapshots and pushing
the "shutter" button (actually, a key on a computer keyboard). The remaining two students were the note-takers.
Because the roles were viewed as differentially desirable, the children spontaneously (and quite smoothly) settled on a turn-
taking regimen that allowed each student to serve in each role over the course of the activity. This worked well in terms of
learner engagement, with the exception of the note-taking activity, where one student typically was temporarily resigned to
watching another student write notes while offering suggestions (which were sometimes ignored by the scribe).

                           Figure 4. Notes taken by children during scouting activity.
Once the Snookerpuss research problem had been established in a whole-class session, six of the individual data collection
groups took turns visiting the field. (The final data collection group served as "checkers" to test the predicted mushroom
count developed from linear interpolation, but their activity was identical.) In class, the children had discussed the kind of
data to be collected, and had developed a data table consisting of three labeled cells (one each for rocks, grass, and sand)
within which they would make tally marks as they encountered mushrooms.
Drawing on the scouting experience, these groups were limited to two children apiece, as this would allow each child to
have an active responsible role during data collection, with one child serving as driver and the other as data recorder. As
with the scouts, turn-taking was unproblematic, with the children spontaneously sharing the two roles.
Accuracy of counting dominated discussion during the small group explorations. In the whole class setting, the children had
discussed traversal algorithms for ensuring a complete count (see next section), and had decided to use the flags as a means
of ensuring that individual mushrooms were not accidentally recorded more than once. Once they arrived in the virtual
environment, however, they discovered that the traversal algorithms they had discussed were difficult to implement, and
they began to explore alternatives.
It was interesting to note that five of the seven exploration groups settled on a similar traversal strategy that had not been
raised during the whole-class discussion. Rather than treating the whole field as a homogeneous space to be covered, they
used the "natural" terrain to break the region into smaller areas. While the field as a whole was too large to use "naked eye"
observations to spot the mushrooms, this strategy was more effective in the smaller regions. Figure 5 shows one group's
depiction of a "radial scan" strategy that they had used during their exploration.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 366

                          Figure 5. Terrain-based surveying developed by exploration group.

Tier 2: Whole-class collaboration
Whole-class collaboration was situated at two points during the unit, first in the setting the research question and planning
of the exploration, and later in the aggregation and analysis of data leading to a prediction of mushroom count based on
linear interpolation.
Following the scouts' report, the teacher built on their observations and told them about the Snookerpuss, a mythical
creature who was not represented in the application. The absence of the Snookerpuss drew a mixed response; some were
relieved at not having to face what was portrayed as a potentially dangerous creature, while others were interested in talking
about his physical characteristics. (Later in the school year, when the children told a visiting member of the school board
about the Snookerpuss, they imbued him with all sorts of interesting physical characteristics. "He's about 12 feet tall and
brownish-green and he's really mean and he has really sharp teeth".)
The fourth graders enthusiastically accepted the story line, and understood that they would have access to a (simulated)
time series of the field. Based on their prior knowledge, the children readily volunteered hypotheses about which growing
medium they believed would be best for the mushrooms. While the students had been introduced to categorical bar graphs,
they had not yet worked with quantitative line graphs, but the class did reach consensus that if they knew the history of the
mushroom    population,  they might   be   in a position to make    an estimate of future  populations. ("If there was   like 10
mushrooms the first month, and like 20 mushrooms the second month, there should be like 30 mushrooms the third month,
and like that.")
Using an overhead projector, volunteers presented suggestions for the design of a data table that could be used for data
collection. Some   students  suggested  maintaining   a  list, with each item in  the list being the type   of terrain in which
mushrooms were found, but that we later rejected in favor of the tally system with labeled cells.
A considerable amount of time was spent dealing with the accuracy of counting. The scouts had reported that the field was
too large for them to simply look around and see all the mushrooms, and the children recognized they would need to
develop a traversal strategy. The teacher prompted discussion by asking whether any of the kids mowed lawns, and if so,
how did they make sure that they had cut all of the grass. The students responded by drawing a variety of traversal
algorithms (back-and-forth with offset, diagonal, spiraling inward) that they thought might be effective. No consensus was
reached on a single strategy; this was left to the individual exploration groups.
Following   the  exploration of  the field by   the data collection groups, the  children  returned to  the whole  class  setting
prepared to present their data. In what turned out to be one of the most engaging activities of the whole unit, the children
came forward, group by group, to fill in their month's population counts on a transparency projected to the whole class
(Figure 6). Initially, the teacher had asked that one representative from each group come forward; this was quickly rejected
by the children, who insisted that the whole group come forward, and that each member of the group be allowed to enter
some of the data on the form. (Note that the October data was not yet entered at this point in the unit; these data were added
later after the children had developed predictions for the October mushroom population and the "checking group" had gone
back to test those predictions.)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page 367

                         Figure 6. Aggregated data entered by children on overhead projector.
After the aggregate data had been entered, the each group proceeded to enter their point data onto a line graph, again at the
overhead projector on a transparency sheet (Figure 7). For many of the students in the class, this was the first time that they
had been asked to represent two-dimensional coordinate data, and the addition of a third variable (terrain type) depicted as
multiple color-coded points on the same graph made the task even more complex. (As one child noted, "it looked like a
bunch of stars".) Notwithstanding the lack of prior experience, the class collectively negotiated the process of representing
the data on the graph. This period of the activity was characterized by a great deal of spontaneous interaction in the form of
suggestions and constructive criticism. ("No, you're on the wrong line. Move it over to the right", "You've gotta use the red
marker for that one", "You're reading your numbers wrong from the table.")
Once all   of the groups had transcribed   their tabular data onto the graph, the students were ready to draw in best-fit
regression lines on which to base their predictions. Initially, the children suggested drawing line segments to connect the
points. After some discussion, the students came to the realization that while this might be good for finding interpolated
data (e.g., the missing June information), it would not provide them with a basis for extrapolation. With the teacher's
guidance, they agreed that a single line which was "kind of in the middle of all the points" (in the words of one student)
would let them predict mushroom populations into the future. With the help of many strongly vocalized suggestions,
students drew best-fit lines on the graph.
Finally, the students discussed the meaning of the graph in relation to their research problem. They first concentrated on the
critical question of whether the Snookerpuss's appetite would be satisfied. While there appeared to be universal consensus
on the interpretation of the graph, there remained some debate on the Y-coordinate of the regression line. A tally of the
student estimates is noted in the upper-right-hand corner of Figure 7. The Snookerpuss needed exactly 34 mushrooms to
satisfy his appetite, so in spite of the individual differences, the class remained confident that there would be enough
mushrooms when he awoke. The students also noted the differences in the growth rates by terrain; several of them talked
about how some of the lines were "steeper" than the others ("like on a hill"), and there was strong agreement that the grass
was the best place for mushrooms to grow ("and if you ran out of room on the grass, then you should plant them in the
sand.") When the checking group returned with an actual count of 36 mushrooms in October (Figure 6), a cheer arose from
the class.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  368

                     Figure 7. Student-drawn best-fit regression lines for mushroom populations

DISCUSSION
At both    the whole-class and    small-group tiers,  the Snookerpuss  adventure          was  designed  to promote   positive
interdependence among learners. At the classroom tier, it was impossible for any individual group to predict the outcome
(the October mushroom count) without the information provided by other groups. At the small-group exploration tier, the
self-assignment of roles made it impossible for an individual student to gather the necessary data without the cooperation of
their group mates.
In related research involving Shared Display Groupware (Stewart, et. al, 1999), Inkpen and her colleagues found that the
presence of multiple input device had a significant impact on students' sense of engagement, as measured by off-task
behavior and level of activity (Inkpen, et. al, 1999). Our qualitative experience mirrors the results in her study, with the
difference that in the case of the Snookerpuss adventure, engagement increased as a function of children having a critical
role, rather than necessarily having their hands on an input device. The responsibility for manual data recording appeared to
compensate for the absence of a widget.
(Recently, we   have begun  to  augment  our  virtual ambient systems with handheld           devices directly supporting data
collection; a test of manual vs. handheld data collection modalities might shed light on their relative merits. However, the
availability of an electronic input device, even if more engaging, might not be warranted from a learning perspective; Holst
(1996), for example, reported on a study in which the use of interactive computer graphics was associated with lowered
mastery of content materials.)
How did children make sense of this activity: was it a game, or was it a math lesson, or was it a field? The fourth graders in
this class were happy to suspend disbelief, and the language of both the small groups and the classrooms was of fields,
mushrooms, and the Snookerpuss, and not of glasses, keyboards, or screens. In discussing the data in the whole class, the
children never questioned whether their counts were "wrong," in spite of the fact that their data was not collinear. To the
students, this was just a field, and this was just the way things were in this field.
What did the kids learn? As mentioned earlier, 75% of the children were able to use a data table to construct a graph, draw
a best-fit line, and make extrapolated predictions in a post-test applied several days after the unit. On average, they were
also able to articulate 3-4 distinct strategies for ensuring accurate counting. (In follow-up discussions with the children,
they were very interested to know how accurately they had counted. The teacher related the importance of counting to
recent events in the U.S. presidential election, which had taken place only a few weeks earlier.) More importantly, as
reported by their teacher, the students continued to cite the Snookerpuss Adventure in subsequent lessons in mathematics
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  369

and science through the remainder of the school year. While anecdotal, this evidence supports the conjecture that the
activity was both memorable and meaningful to the students. Perhaps the most important outcome of the activity was the
adoption among the students of an attitude of competence in the conduct of scientific investigations; in the words of one
girl, "We're little scientists."
The activity structure exemplified in the Snookerpuss adventure has now been employed on a half-dozen units conducted at
grades two, four, and six using different configurations of the Field to support different mathematics learning goals. It has
proven to be a workable model for providing shared access to a scarce resource within a conventional school setting, and
teachers have been able to easily integrate the small-group activities into their regular educational program. Innovative
technologies embody potential that may only be realized by a deep sensitivity to the context of their deployment (Brown &
Edelson, 1999), and the activity structure described here is intended as a small advance in that evolution.
We expect that technology advances will relatively render the marginal cost of using large displays--and even virtual
reality systems--insignificant over the next decade. However, continuing personnel costs cannot be expected to decrease,
so that a model based on adult-supervised pullouts is not sustainable in the long run. In our most recent projects, we have
begun to explore the use of large-format displays (plasma panels) deployed directly in the classroom, under varying models
of guided inquiry.

             Figure 8. Children using virtual ambient deployed on a plasma panel in a sixth grade room

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to express their gratitude to Victor Baez and his fourth grade students. We also wish to acknowledge the
help of Andy  Johnson,  Yalu       Lin, and Yongjoo Cho  in the development of the  Field application, the    advice of Josh
Radinsky and Marlynne Nishimura in the design of the unit, and the suggestions of the anonymous referees. This work was
supported, in part, by  the      National Science Foundation's Graduate Students in K-12   Education   (DUE-9979537)     and
Information Technology Research (EIA-0085946) programs.

REFERENCES
American Association for the Advancement of Science (1993) Benchmarks for Science Literacy: Project 2061. Oxford
        University Press, New York, NY.
Brown, M., and Edelson, D. (1999) A Lab by Any Other Name: Integrating Traditional Labs and Computer-Supported
        Collaborative Investigations in Science Classrooms. Proceedings of CSCL '99 (Palo Alto, CA, Dec. 1999), 73-80.
de Jong, T., van Joolingen, W.R., Swaak, J., Veermans, K., Limbach, R., King, S., and Gureghian, D. (1998) Self-directed
        learning in simulation-based discovery environments. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 14, 235-246.
Dewey, J. (1910) Science as subject-matter and as method. Science, 31, 121-127.
Friedler, Y., Nachmia, R, and Linn, M. (1990) Learning scientific reasoning skills in microcomputer-based laboratories.
        Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 27, 173-191.
Holst, S. (1996) Directing learner attention with manipulation styles. CHI '96 Conference Companion (Vancouver, Canada,
        April 1996), 43-44.
Inkpen, K., Ho-Ching, W., Kuederle, O., Scott, S. and Shoemaker, G. (1999) "This is Fun! We're All Best Friends and
        We're All Playing.": Supporting Children's Synchronous Collaboration. Proceedings of CSCL '99 (Palo Alto, CA,
        Dec. 1999), 252-259.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page 370

Jackson, R., and Winn, W. (1999) Collaboration and Learning in Immersive Virtual Environments. Proceedings of CSCL
         '99 (Palo Alto, CA, Dec. 1999), 260-264.
Jackson, S., Stratford, S., Krajcik, J., and Soloway, E. (1994) Making dynamic modeling accessible to pre-college science
         students. Interactive Learning Environments, 4, 3, 233-257.
Moher, T., Johnson, A., Cho, Y., and Lin, Y. (2000) Observation-Based Inquiry in a Virtual Ambient Environment. In B.
         Fishman & S. O'Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.), Fourth International Conference of the Learning Sciences (Ann Arbor ,
         MI, June 2000), Erlbaum, Mahwah NJ, 238-245.
Moher, T., Johnson, A., and Cho, Y. (2001) First-Person Science Inquiry in Virtual Ambient Environments. CHI 2001
         Extended Abstracts (Seattle, WA, March/April 2001), 261-262.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) (1998) Principles and Standards for School Mathematics Electronic
         Version: Discussion Draft (http://standards-e.nctm.org/1.0/normal/index.html).
National Research Council. (1996) National science education standards. National Research Council, Washington DC.
Smith, B. and Reiser, B. (1998) National Geographic unplugged: Classroom-centered design of interactive nature films.
         Proceedings of CHI '98 (Los Angeles, CA, May 1998), 424-431.
Soloway, E., Grant, W., Tinker, R., Roschelle, J., Mills, M., Resnick, M., Berg, R., and Eisenberg, M. (1999) Science in the
         Palms of Their Hands. Communications of the ACM, 42, 21-26.
Stewart, J., Bederson, B., and Druin, A. (1999)     Single display   groupware: A  model    for co-present collaboration.
         Proceedings of CHI '99 (Pittsburg, PA, May 1999), 286-293.
