Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 371

K. (TECHNOLOGY TRACK): SYNCHRONOUS COLLABORATION SUPPORT
FOR ADULTS

      Evidence from a Series of Experiments on Video-
      mediated Collaboration: Does Eye Contact Matter?
                                                    Richard Joiner
                              Department of Psychology, University of Bath, UK.
                                                    r.joiner@bath.ac.uk
                                                    Eileen Scanlon
                        Institute of Educational Technology, Open University, UK.
                                                  e.scanlon@open.ac.uk
                                                      Tim O'Shea
                                 Birkbeck College, University of London, UK.
                                                  Randall B. Smith
                                 Sun Microsystems Laboratory, California, USA.
                                                      Canan Blake
                        Institute of Educational Technology, Open University, UK.
ABSTRACT
We report a series of studies on the role of eye contact in video-mediated communication. These are part of an ongoing
research program, which is investigating the usefulness of the technological mediated collaborative problem solving for
distance learning. Technological mediation consists of access to shared simulations and access to a variety of means of
communication.   The  means   of communication    we  have  explored range    from audio   only contact to   video mediated
communication with or without eye contact. The motivating question behind this research program is `what is different
when members of a problem-solving group are physically separated but technologically connected?' The studies are set in
the context of pairs of adults working with shared simulations of either physics or statistical experiments. The first set of
studies investigated pairs working on a shared simulation of a physics experiment developed in SharedARK. The study
compared remote technological mediated communication with communication that occurred during physical co-presence.
There were no differences in performance, but the addition of computer mediated communication did influence the pattern
of interaction. These experiments   suggested  that eye contact   influenced  problem  solving. The  second  set   of studies
compared pairs and groups of threes and fours using a simulation of a statistic experiment developed in a system called
Kansas. In these studies we compared learners with either video-mediated communication or audio only communication.
The  addition of the  visual communication    channel altered the pattern  of interaction. The  most  recent study    presents
evidence that suggests eye contact facilitated conceptual understanding..

Keywords
Collaboration, Science, Simulation, and Evaluation

INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we discuss the role of eye contact in technologically mediated collaboration. This is discussed in the context
of a ten-year series of experiments designed to explore the usefulness of the technological mediation of collaborative
problem solving. The components of the technological mediation are access to shared simulations and access to a variety of
means  of communication   with   co-learners. These   means of  communication   range   from   audio contact only  to  video
conferencing with and without full eye contact. The purpose of this work is the desire to make the future use of such
technologies by distance learners as effective as possible. Over the period in which these experiments have been run, there
have been developments in the extent to which such technologies are available and affordable for schools and colleges.
This paper therefore  reviews  this work and   as a  consequence  describes   how  the use  of  information  communication
technology alters the experience of learners in these settings. This programme builds on past work evaluating science based
computer assisted learning software with both children in schools and adults in other settings (see e.g. Smith et al., 1991,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  372

Scanlon  et al., 1993, Taylor  et al., 1993).  The  focus of  the  programme  is   to explore the potential of collaborating
technologies for distance learning. The motivating question for the research programme is `what is different when members
of a problem solving group are physically separated then reconnected via this type of computer and communications
technology?'

TASKS MEDIATED BY TECHNOLOGY
Introducing technology into a setting can have both predictable and unpredictable effects. It is our experience that using
technologically mediated collaboration changes the nature of the activity in ways we had not predicted. We discuss these
later in the case studies but first we review findings from other empirical studies of technologically mediated problem
solving.
Early laboratory studies compared video-mediated communication with audio only communication on cognitive problem
solving tasks and found no benefits of video mediated communication in terms of performance efficiency or quality (e.g.
Chapanis 1975; Chapanis et al., 1972, Reid, 1977, Short et al, 1976, Williams, 1977). More recent studies have reported
similar findings. Fish et al., (1992) compared the use of videophones with audio only telephones and found no difference in
usage statistics. Kraut et al., (1996) compared participants working with an expert on a bicycle repair task, with video-
mediated communication and with audio only and found no difference in the time taken or quality of the performance. In a
follow up study Fussell et al., (2000) compared participants who were located side-by-side or connected via audio-video or
audio-only links. They replicated their finding from the previous study and found no difference between audio-only and
audio-video conditions in terms of the interaction or the performance of the participants in the audio Anderson et al., (1997)
used a map task and found no differences in performance between those used video mediated communication and those
using audio only communication.
Only in tasks involving conflict resolution and negotiation is there positive evidence for the benefits of video-mediated
communication. Olson et al., (1995, 1997) reported that face to face or video-mediated communication produced higher
quality designs than groups who used only audio only communication. Veinott et al, (1999) compared the performance of
people explaining a map route to each other. Half were native speakers of English and half were non-native speakers of
English. They    found that non-native  speakers  benefited   from video-mediated     communication  whereas   there was no
difference in performance of the native speakers who used video-mediated communication compared to those who used
audio only communication. Thus research in this area seem to suggest that the benefits of video mediated communication
are be dependent on the nature of the task.
Although commercial video conferencing systems are becoming more prevalent, there are a variety of parameters which
require further examination to establish fitness for purpose. 0'Malley et al., (2001) report on work in the Eye-2-Eye project
which aims to provide comparative data in order to understand the different uses and cost benefits of different technologies.
One of their interesting findings from this project is the decreased likelihood of lying when pairs were able to see each other
using a videoconference compared to when they used an audio-only conference. Fulwood (2001) has investigated the
problems in communication associated with the positioning of the camera in relation to the monitor. In this set-up direct eye
contact is impossible and the lack of it was reported a problem by the users. His solution was to train them to gaze into the
camera rather than the monitor.

CASE STUDIES OF SYNCHRONOUS COLLABORATION
We have   been   studying synchronous   collaboration in  the context of  adults working  on  shared simulations. The  main
technological base has been provided by a number of systems designed by Randall Smith. The Alternate Reality Kit, ARK
(Smith, 1992) was a system for creating interactive animated simulations implemented in the Smalltalk-80 programming
environment.   The Shared   Alternate  Reality Kit, SharedARK,     (Smith et al.,  1991)  and  KANSAS,    a network   shared
application space (Smith, in press) are prototype technologies for allowing students to work together at a distance from each
other on a shared simulation while maintaining voice and eye contact. The following are two simulations used to explore
the capabilities of the shared space for problem solving, the Running in the rain experiment and the Gameshow experiment.

The `Running in the Rain' experiment
Our primary purpose in this experiment was to assess the usability of the SharedARK technology and to identify factors
which were important in facilitating collaborative problem solving with this technology. We did this by comparing remote
electronically mediated   communication   during collaborative  problem   solving, with  that occurring during physical  co-
presence. These experiments involved eleven pairs of adults working at a simulation of an under-specified problem. Four of
the pairs of participants used the video tunnel while working together on the simulation, three worked on the simulation as
co-present participant pairs and two pairs worked remotely with only audio contact. We used the problem of whether to run
or walk in the rain without an umbrella (De Angelis, 1987). Running means spending less time in the rain, but, on the other
hand, since you are running into some rain, you might end up wetter than if you had walked.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 373

In these experiments two users are in separate rooms with a workstation each, and communicate through a high fidelity,
hands free audio link and with a camera /monitor device called a video-tunnel which enables both voice and eye contact
through the use of a beam splitter and a mirror (see figure 1).

                                      Camera

                                      Monitor

                                                  Beam Splitter

                                                  Figure 1: Video Tunnel
After an eight to ten minute introduction to the interface and the task, the participants were given a simulation containing a
rain cloud, a rain runner and a device to control simulation parameters such as the speed and the direction of the rain and
the wetness of the runner. During the introduction they are told that the object of the activity is for them to jointly agree
when it is worth running in the rain. They are shown how to make the runner wider and narrower, how to make the runner
move and how to switch the rain on and off. Participants were invited to use the simulation to test their ideas and after
ninety minutes they were asked to report on their findings.
A data capture suite was used to capture video records of the interaction, which were then displayed in a four-way matrix.
For pairs this meant capturing each user's screen and their video conferencing record. (For the larger groups a single shared
screen was recorded with each individual user's video.) Video cameras were used to record task performance. One camera
was used to record task performance. One camera captures the information displayed on screen. This data collection set-up
was inspired by the development of the media space at Xerox PARC in the mid-eighties (see Bly et al., 1993), and then
developed further in Rank Xerox research centre Cambridge where the running in the rain experiments were recorded. This
facility was then developed in the Computers and Learning Research Group at the Open University where later experiments
took place.
Four synchronous video signals made up of what was displayed on the two video-tunnel screens and the two simulation
screens worked on by the participants. The video protocol was analysed by relating utterances made by participants to both
events in working with the simulation and eye contact. Participants' activities and utterances from their verbal protocols
were categorised according the type of activity in which participants were engaged, according to whether it involved the
interface, (e.g. figuring out how to alter the rain runner's speed, or the rain runner thicker), the task (discussion about
running  in the rain or  social interaction (e.g. laughing      at jokes). These    utterances were then further assigned  to
subcategories called meta-level activity, specific activity and recovery, which further describe the nature of the activity. For
example, meta-level activity might be generating hypotheses, or discussing problem-solving strategies, specific activity
might be talk  generated in doing the task,  and  recovery   from    breakdown   might  be recovery  from interface errors or
misunderstandings during a conversation. Features of the dialogue are described in Taylor et al. (1993), and the type of
augmented problem solving which was facilitated described in Scanlon et al. (1993), and the nature of the shared space and
its role in establishing successful collaboration described in Smith et al. (1991).
This analysis revealed some interesting features. Use of the video channel was correlated with activity when participants
were not directly manipulating the interface. We found several examples of jokes being cracked across the video channel.
There are long periods where the video tunnel was not used at all, for example when objects are being manipulated or data
points collected. However when the participants were talking about what they observe or suggesting hypotheses or planning
experiments they look towards their partner through the tunnel. Another difference was that participants who could see each
other were terser and less explicit. We hypothesised that a video channel might encourage non-interface specific activity
and indeed meta-level discourse about the task was accompanied by much higher levels of eye contact than was specific
talk about the interface. There was also considerable differences in the way that different pairs negotiated their problem
solving
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 374

The unique shared space created by the participants using the technology is interesting. The use of overlapping (shared) and
non-overlapping work areas seemed to have encouraged task division but also role division was fluid. Participants can both
be face to face through the video tunnel and side by side looking at the SharedARK interface. This would suggest that pairs
using the video tunnel might do better in solving the problem since being face to face facilitates patterns of mutual gaze.
We thought that more productive problem solving might ensue. In considering the use that participants made of the video
tunnel, which coincided with joint assent to particular decisions particularly at the planning phase. This side to side and
face to face combination was not available to co-present pairs, and seemed to influence how role and task division takes
place. In the audio-only condition there was more explicit negotiation of task division than in the video condition
In substance it appeared from this exploratory experiment that the addition of a video channel influenced the users activity
by encouraging interaction about the problem Comparing the problem solutions produced by pairs on this task with written
problem solutions (see Scanlon et al., 1993) the study demonstrated that the use of audio links and video tunnels does not
attenuate the problem solving behaviour of pairs working on the task but in fact enhances it. In particular this experiment
highlighted the importance of eye contact in joint problem solving.

The GAMESHOW experiment
This work informed the design of a second series of studies exploring a statistics-based simulation implemented in a
distributed classroom environment designed by Randall Smith at Sun Microsystems called KANSAS. This allows several
physically distributed users to move about in a 2D space (called "Kansas" because it is very extensive and flat not because
it also stands for KANSAS: a networked shared application space.) Moving together and apart in Kansas will make and
break audio connections. Users each have a window in which they can see their local portion of Kansas. Each user sees a
small local rectangular portion of Kansas and can scroll their viewpoints across the vast surface, causing their rectangles to
overlap in order to collaborate, or can move away from others to work alone. Our experiment here was conducted on a
version of Kansas which supports up to 5 simultaneously active users (or, of course, up to 5 groups of users) and users can
be given access to audio or both video and audio links between each of the 5 locations. Randall Smith has experimented
with larger numbers of simultaneous users (see Sipusic et al., 1999 for another educational use of this technology).
We used a game show simulation of a well-known statistics problem- the Monty Hall dilemma to explore a number of
related themes.
·   The effect of working with a simulation on concept development in statistics.
·   The influence of the bandwidth of the communication channels on the collaboration.
·   The scalability of the collaborative experience.
·   The usability of the interface design.
We have collected data on 6 pairs of participants, two groups of three and a group of four using the shared simulation
augmented by audio communication. We also have collected data on five pairs who used a video tunnel to provide a video
channel of communication, and a further four pairs working with altered video tunnels where there is no eye contact. In this
paper, we are comparing data from pairs working with the video tunnels and pairs working with the altered video tunnels.
We are using a simulation of a well known statistics problem- the Monty Hall dilemma originating in an TV gameshow
called `Let's make a deal' where the gameshow host encouraged contestants to make a choice between three items, and
then change their choice. This problem is non trivial and caused extensive correspondence between statisticians when
discussed in a newspaper (see Hoffman 1999). The groups of participants were asked to explore the problem with the aid of
a shared simulated game show setting, a shared note-taking tool and a remote human host. They communicate over an
audio or video link. The game show host displays the consequences of their choices. We have recorded videos of adults at
working together on the statistics simulation in different physical locations and observed their problem solving behaviours
and the impact of the experience on their understanding of concepts in probability.
The participants were interviewed and given an individual pre-test questionnaires. The participants were told.
`You are a game show contestant. You have won through to the final round and your final challenge is to choose one of
three doors. Behind one but only one of the doors is a Mercedes. You announce your selection but before you open the door
the game show host 'helpfully' opens one of the doors which was not the one you have chosen. It doesn't have a car behind
it. What should you do, stick to your original choice or change'
In the pre-test, they were asked individually to make a prediction and to give a reason for that prediction. Then they were
introduced to their partners and given a shared simulation to conduct experiments. The time taken on the task ranged from
30 minutes  to  90 minutes. After the simulated   experiment,    students still in their groups were  asked to make   a  joint
statement of their solution and to comment     on    whether it  had changed    from their individual statements.   Then they
completed an individual post test questionnaire to establish what their own opinion was. They were asked to state what they
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 375

thought the best strategy for the game contestant to pursue. They also were asked to make a prediction about what the best
strategy to pursue if the problem had four doors and the game show host opened two of them.
When groups devised simple highly focused ways of summarising the data that could be viewed in a single window they
were much more likely to identify and resolve their mathematical misconceptions. The most elegant summary was a two by
two matrix of success/fail versus stick/change where the appropriate cell was updated by one of the participants after each
go at the game.
In this experimental situation we describe above, the learning experience was managed in part by the game show host and
this raises another issue related to scalability- the issue of learner support. In this case the learning support demands appear
to be much more acute than those found in the conventional classroom (see O'Shea, Smith, & Scanlon, 1997).
This system was designed to allow participants working collaboratively to solve particular problem. The particular focus
here was on trying to understand how students could use a system which allowed them to conduct variable based practical
experiments to help them develop their knowledge and understanding of a statistics topic. Simulations on computers can
allow many experiments to be conducted quickly to develop an understanding of statistical topics. We found some success
with this method (the majority of students made progress in their understanding of the problem in addition to the detection
of many of the misconceptions about randomness cited above. Students however held widely differing views about how
many trials of different strategies were necessary to build up a sensible picture of the outcomes of different strategies. A full
account of their attempts is given in Scanlon et al. (1997).
As  to the influence of the  means   of  communication  on    collaborative problem  solving, we  were able  to compare  the
behaviour of pairs communicating with an audio channel only or a video channel. The influence of the video channel was
less marked than in the previous Shared Ark experiment in terms of pattern of discourse. Some pairs using audio were
fairly terse, but some were quite discursive. The use of audio only however did require more interchanges clarifying task
division. For example one pair communicating over audio only about their use of the shared note taking tool comment:

                X        Sorry, D. am I blitzing you?
                Y        Yeah I didn't realise that, so who is going to... what shall we do about... shall we
                         have a procedure for making the notes so we both don't try and type at the same
                         time?
                X        OK
                Y
                         Shall I type in?
                X        You go ahead and type in yes

However, in some pairs, the access to and use of the video channel did lead to a better co-ordination of views between the
two participants, what they thought the position was what they thought a good experiment to do was. One pair in particular
used the video channel to explain their current view of the problem was even drawing diagrams to explain what they
thought the explanation for the successful strategy was. In addition this pair's conversations over the video channel had a
particular courteous quality

                X        Do you want to do any more, or do you think we've..?
                Y        I'd quite like to try ten more with not changing
                X        OK You're best at writing, do you think, it doesn't depend on who chooses
                         does it?
                Y        I don't think so
                X        It's the policies what count, so do you want to choose and I'll count this time?

We have also begun to analyse the effects of technological mediation on conceptual change. We compared the pairs using
the video  tunnel with  the  pairs using video-mediated communication       without eye contact: in terms of  the number of
participants who changed from saying stick was the best strategy to saying that swap was the best strategy. Table 1 shows
the results from this comparison.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   376

                                                                   Change           No Change

                           Audio Only                                   2                  4
                           VMC with Eye Contact                         4                  4
                           VMC without Eye Contact                      1                  9

                                 Table 1: Number of participants who change their opinion.
Interestingly the pairs using the video tunnel were significantly more likely to change their opinion than participants using
video mediated communication with no eye contact. The audio only and the VMC without conditions were collapsed
together because in the table above more than 4 cells had an expected frequency less than 5 (Chi-squared = 5.5, df = 1, p <
0.05). This tendency to change made them more successful in there problem solving.

COMPARISON OF THE CASE STUDIES
The two    systems described  here differ in the  extent   to which     the computer-based   component   and  the audio-video
component are distinct. In Shared Ark they are disjoint, as the audio /video is output to a device completely separated form
the computer screen, while in KANSAS the audio/video is integrated with the interface. However more fundamentally for
both systems the video and computational components are separate. For the use of the systems that we have explored this is
not an issue, as we have used audio/video only for communication between learners but the possibilities of integration
between video and simulation lead to possibilities for more extended experimentation.
Videoconferencing is an appealing possibility for distance education. Multiple video images can be displayed on a single
monitor (for effects see Smith, in press). For pairs of students the augmented video contact of the video tunnel provided a
sense of eye to eye contact . Multiple video sources can be displayed together but there is no way yet to simulate this
improved eye contact for larger groups of users.
Comparing the two simulations they had some similar features but also some differences. For example, the Running in the
rain simulation required more attention from participants, while the Game show simulation was more dependent on the
successful use of  the shared note-taking  tool. In addition,  in both   experiments, as   well  as acting as an  experimental
resource, the shared notebook implemented on the screen became a shared focus for discussion (see e.g. Enyedy et al.,
1997)

CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
The motivating question for the research described here was to explore situations when members of a problem solving
group are  physically  separated then reconnected   via combinations     of  computer and    communications   technology. The
provision of a simulation which members of the group could explore is a key feature of the systems we describe here. Our
finding in general is that distributed problem solving can be supported by appropriate technologies without attenuation, but
we have also noticed ways in which the interaction is altered by the technology. If we consider a pair of individuals
working together in the same room, the way in which they interact will vary over time, their proximity will vary. When a
technology is the medium of communication between two physically separated individuals the proximity relations will be
altered. They will not be able to touch but equally they cannot remove themselves from the interaction without breaking it
off altogether. They can work side by side while in the video condition be face to face with their partner. So although there
may be a loss of quality in the communication via audio or video channels the proximity relations may be enhanced with an
effect on talk about the problem. (See Smith et al, 1991 for further discussion of this.)
The key dimensions of variation which have been explored in these experiments are the number of learners working
together, whether or not they are physically co-located, and the bandwidth of the communication channels available to
them. The bulk of experience reported here is with pairs of participants communicating remotely over audio or video with
physically co located pairs used to draw comparisons. Indeed the main result of this work is to develop a picture of the
shared space created by shared simulations and video communication tools. In both cases, the participants quickly learn to
use the simulations and come to terms with the shared audio-video-computer space in which they find themselves. The
shared space created by this technology places participants into a kind of enhanced proximity in which it is possible to be
simultaneously side-by-side  and  face-to-face.  There  is much   still to  be explored   about how  such  workspaces can  be
designed to maximise the beneficial effects of collaborative problem solving. We can in these case studies demonstrate
particular ways in which participants have used this rich shared resource to augment and facilitate their joint problem
solving, which gives us considerable hope that such systems will be developed for distance learners. We find the role of eye
contact in video-mediated communication is important in both our first and second set of studies.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page 377

Sometimes     it has   been claimed    that the  nature  of the activity change   caused by  the use  of  technologically  mediated
collaboration alters the authenticity or reality of the learner's experience, either positively or negatively. However the
change in the working practices of scientists over the last few years while we have been engaged in this research means that
communication over networks as part of collaborative working is a now common part of the working practices of modern
scientists. Therefore the context of this work which began as a laboratory investigation of an unfamiliar and futuristic
setting for group working is one which today's students now accept as a reflection of the type of settings they may
encounter   in   their future   working   lives. Students   and teachers    can confidently predict   the continuing integration of
information and communication technologies with other tools and educational researchers can expect to build and test
virtual learning environments, focussing on identifying the different special properties of such new shared spaces.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the members of the Running in the Rain project team (Josie Taylor and Claire
O'Malley) and Game show project team (Yibing Li, David Perry, Mark Treglown, Canan Tosunoglu).
REFERENCES
Bly,  S., Harrison,    S. and   Irwin, S. (1993).   Media   Spaces: bringing    people together in  a video,  audio  and computing
          environnment. Communications of the ACM, 36, 28-45.
Chapanis, A. (1975). Interactive Human Communication. Scientific American, 232, 34-42.
Chapanis, A., Ochsman, R., Parish, R., & Weeks, G. (1972). Studies in interactive communication: the effects of four
          modes on the behaviour of teams during cooperative problem solving. Human Factors, 14, 487-509.
De Angelis, D.(1987). Is it really worth running in the rain? European Journal of Physics, 8, 201-202.
Enyedy, N., Vahey, P., and Gifford, B.(1997). Active and supportive computer-mediated reseources for student -to-student
          conversations. In Hall, R., Miyake, N. and Enyedy, N. (Eds.) Proceedings of Computer Support for Collaborative
          Learning 97, December 10-14 Toronto
Fish, R.,  Kraut,  R.,  Root,   R. and  Rice,    R. (1992).  Evaluating  video  as a technology  for  information   communication,
          Communication of the ACM, 36, 48-61.
Fullwood,   C.   (2001).  Video-mediated     gazing  behaviour:  training   and  advice for improvement    of communication    over
          video-mediated    technologies.    Paper   presented  at the   International  Conference  on    Communication,  Problem-
          Solving and Learning. University of Strathclyde, June 25-29.
Fussell,  S., Kraut,   R.   E., &  Siegal,  J.,  (2000). Coordination    of communication:   effects  of  shared  visual context on
          collaborative work In the Proceedings on the ACM 2000 Conference on Computer supported cooperative work
          December 2 - 6, 2000, Philadelphia, PA USA.
Hoffman, P. (1999). The man who loved only numbers. London: Fourth Estate.
Kraut, R. E., Miller, M. D. & Siegel, J. (1996). Collaboration in Performance of Physical Tasks: Effects on Outcome and
          Communication. Proceedings of the Computer Supported Cooperative Work Conference, CSCW'96. (pp. 57-66).
          NY: ACM Press.
O'Malley, C.,Langton, S.,Anderson, A.,Doherty-Sneddon, G. & Bruce, V.(1996) Comparison of face-to face- and video
          mediated interaction. Interacting with Computers, 8, 177-192.
O'Malley, C., Brundell, P., Lonsdale, P., Brooks, P., Asting, T., Heim, J., Schlieman, T., Skjetne, J. H., Hestness, B.,
          Nilsen,  S.,  Ulseth,  T.,   Frowein,  H.  &   Aaaby,  C.  (2001).    Eye-2-Eye:  Fitness for   purpose of person-person
          communication     technologies.    Paper   presented  at the   International  Conference  on    Communication,  Problem-
          Solving and Learning. University of Strathclyde, June 25-29.
O'Shea, T., Smith, R., Scanlon, E., Li, Y. (1997) Exploring the scalability of object-oriented environments that support
          synchronous distributed collaboration, Proceedings of EDMEDIA-97, Calgary.
Olson, J., Olson, G. & Meader, D. (1995). What mix of video and audio is useful for remote real time work. Proceedings of
          CHI '95 (pp. 362-368). New York: ACM Press.
Olson, J., Olson, G. & Meader, D. (1997). Face to face group work compared to remote group work with and without
          video. In K. E. Finn, A. J. Sellen, S. B. Wilbur (Eds.) Video-Mediated Communication (pp. 157 ­ 173). Mahwah,
          NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reid, A. (1977). Comparing the telephone with face to face interaction. In I. Pool (Ed.) The social impact of the telephone,
          (pp. 362-368). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page    378

Scanlon, E., O'Shea, T., Driver, R., Draper, S., Hennessy, S., Hartley, J. R., O'Malley, C., Twigger, D.(1993). Twenty-nine
       children, five computers and a teacher, Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
       Society, Boulder, Colorado: Cognitive Science Society.
Scanlon, E., O'Shea, T. & Smith, R. (1997). Supporting the Distributed Synchronous Learning of Probability: learning from
       an experiment. In Hall, R., Miyake, N. and Enyedy, N. (eds.) Proceedings of the Second International Conference
       on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, CSCL `97 (pp. 224-230). New York: ACM Press.
Scanlon, E., O'Shea, T., Smith, R., O'Malley, C. and Taylor, J. (1993) Running in the rain-can a shared simulation help to
       decide? Physics Education, 28,107-113.
Sipusic, M. J., Pannoni, R. L., Smith, R. B., Dutra, J., Gibbons, J. F. & Sutherland, W. R. (1999). Virtual Collaborative
       learning: A comparison between    face-to-face tutored video     instruction and distributed video  instruction. Sun
       Microsystems   laboratories Inc. TR-99-72.   (Available    at http://www.sun.com/research/techrep/1999/abtsract-
       72.html).
Short, J., Williams, E. & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecommunications. London: Wiley.
Smith, R.B. (1992) A prototype futuristic technology for distance education. In Scanlon, E. and O'Shea, T. (Eds) New
       developments in Educational Technology. Location: Springer-Verlag.
Smith, R. (in press) KANSAS: a dynamically programmable multi-user virtual reality. In O'Shea, T. and Scanlon, E. (Eds.)
       Virtual learning environments and the role of the teacher.
Smith, R., O'Shea, T., O'Malley, C., Scanlon, E., Taylor, J. (1991). Preliminary experiments with a distributed, multi-media
       problem-solving environment.   In  Bowers,   J.M. and   Benford,    S.D. (Eds.)   Studies in  Computer   Supported
       Cooperative Work: theory, practice and design. (pp. 31-48). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Taylor, J. A., O'Shea, T., Scanlon, E., O'Malley, C., & Smith, R., (1993) Discourse and Harmony: Preliminary findings in a
       case-study of multi-media   collaborative problem solving.    In R. Glanville  &  G. de   Zeeuw  (Eds.), Interactive
       Interfaces and Human Networks. Amsterdam: Thesis Publishers.
Veinott, E., Olson, J., Olson, G. M. & Fu, X. (1999). Video helps remote work: speakers who need to negotiate common
       ground benefits from seeing each other. Proceedings of the CHI' 99, (pp. 302-308). New York: ACM.
