Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  379

        Fostering Collaborative Knowledge Construction in
Desktop Video-conferencing. Effects of Content Schemes
        and Cooperation Scripts in Peer Teaching Settings
                                 Markus Reiserer, Bernhard Ertl, Heinz Mandl
                               Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany
                                              reiserer@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de

ABSTRACT
Video-conferencing    is  expected   to become     increasingly  important  for   tele-learning   environments. In  contrast  to
asynchronous, text-based computer-mediated communication, video-conferencing facilitates cooperation tasks that require
highly frequent and continuous coordination. Typical kinds of such cooperation tasks are found in peer teaching settings.
Despite the growing application of video-conferencing, only little is known about possibilities of enhancing collaboration in
video-conferencing settings. This study investigates the effects of different types of support for cooperation on the learning
outcomes of peer dyads in a video-conferencing scenario. The main research question is how cooperation scripts and
content schemes enhance the students' cognitive activities and foster the outcomes of cooperative learning. Two factors
were varied experimentally: The content scheme (with/without) and the cooperation script (with/without). 86 university
students of educational   psychology    participated  in the study. Each   student  of a dyad   received a text dealing  with a
psychological theory in the field of the nature-nurture-debate. The students' tasks were (1) to teach their partners the
relevant contents of their text and (2) to reflect ideas that went beyond the scope of the text. Results indicate that in
particular the cooperation script enhances learning outcomes of collaborative knowledge construction.

Keywords
Collaborative knowledge construction, video-conferencing, content schemes, cooperation scripts

INTRODUCTION
Research on cooperative learning in video-conferencing has become increasingly interesting for educational psychology.
The rapid developments in the field of information and communication technology suggest that video-conferencing will be
intensively applied   in educational  institutions in the  near future, since it enables  synchronous    forms  of collaborative
distance learning which allow very frequent and complex interactions. So far, research in this field has mainly aimed at
investigating differences with respect to interaction and communication between video-conferencing and other modes of
cooperation, in particular face-to-face and asynchronous text-based cooperation. Yet, only a few studies in the field of
video-conferencing have focused on processes and outcomes in the context of learning. This study tries to bridge this gap
by investigating effects of content schemes and cooperation scripts on processes and outcomes of collaborative learning in
video-conference settings.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Contents, processes, and outcomes of collaborative knowledge construction in face-to-face and video-
conference settings
Learning contents and learning processes
So far, only a few studies on video-conferencing have analyzed collaborative knowledge construction systematically. The
analyses and  descriptions  of collaborative  knowledge      construction basically  discriminate  content-related and  process-
related aspects. Regarding   the content  level,   a major   question concerns   the  distinction between  on-task  and off-task
contents. In particular, it has been analyzed to what extent, how frequently, or how adequately learners talk about relevant
contents of the learning task (e.g. Cohen, 1994). Another aspect of content-related aspects that is especially relevant in the
context of video-conferencing concerns the coordination of learning activities. When analyzing discourse processes in
video-conference settings, Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, and Mandl (in press, b) distinguish between task-related and technology-
related  coordination.   According to   them, task-related   coordination  during  collaboration  is positively correlated with
individual learning outcomes. Moreover, they conclude that there are no significant differences between collaboration in
video-conferencing and in face-to-face settings, neither concerning task-related coordination nor concerning technology-
related coordination.
In addition  to  discourse  contents, other   approaches   include  the analysis   of  process-related aspects  of collaborative
knowledge construction. Webb (1991), for example, analyzed explanations with different levels of elaboration, whereas
Graesser and Person (1994) focused on questions in tutoring discourse. Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, and Mandl (1998) presented
an approach that analyzed four processes of collaborative knowledge construction: (1) Externalization refers to the process
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 380

of contributing prior individual knowledge. This exchange of different individual concepts is considered to be the starting
point of negotiating common meaning. (2) Elicitation refers to the strategy of using the learning partner as a resource
(Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye, & O'Malley, 1996). Learners cause each other to externalize task-related knowledge: By asking
questions, for example, they induce their partners to give explanations. Thereby, elicitation can be responsible for activating
deeper comprehension processes (e.g. King, 1994). (3) Conflict-oriented negotiation, another aspect of collaborative know-
ledge construction, refers to the concept of socio-cognitive conflict (cf. Dillenbourg et al., 1996; Doise & Mugny, 1984).
Socio-cognitive conflict occurs in situations in which learning partners externalize different or contrasting interpretations
related to the learning task. This conflict often results in modifications of knowledge representations. (4) Apart from con-
flict-oriented negotiation, another way of reaching a consensus is the integration of different individual perspectives into a
common interpretation or solution of the given task. However, although this form of consensus-building can be helpful
under some  conditions, it involves the  risk of turning into  a conflict-avoiding  cooperation   style. Considering current
empirical findings, Fischer  and   Mandl (2000a)    conclude   that there   are no substantial   differences between   video-
conferencing and face-to-face settings concerning the processes of knowledge construction described above.

Learning outcomes
Research on cooperative learning focusses on different concepts of learning outcomes. Frequently, individual outcomes of
cooperative learning are in the center of research interest. Therefore, cooperative learning efforts aim at the development of
individual cognitive, socio-cognitive or affective abilities. In contrast to the focus on individual learning outcomes, other
approaches  emphasize the  importance of  collaborative  outcomes,   which  are  achieved   by a joint solution of the  given
cooperation task (e.g. Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1993). In a recent study, Bruhn (2000) found that (1) dyads in the video-
conferencing environment attained similar collaborative outcomes compared to dyads in a face-to-face setting, and that (2)
learners in the two different settings did not differ with respect to individual outcomes. Similar to the findings concerning
the learning processes, these results show that the different measures of learning outcomes do not differ substantially from
each other in video-conferencing and face-to-face settings.
Another aspect concerning learning outcomes is the extent of knowledge convergence between the learning partners of a
dyad or group. The concept of knowledge convergence refers to the degree to which individual learning outcomes of former
learning partners are comparable in quality and quantity (Fischer & Mandl, 2000b). Aspects of knowledge convergence
have rarely been considered up till now. Fischer, Bruhn, et al. (in press, b) presented empirical findings of a recent study
that indicate that knowledge convergence is neither lower nor higher in video-conferencing than in face-to-face settings.

Fostering collaborative knowledge construction in face-to-face settings
The interactions described  above,  which   are  seen to    be critical for effective cooperative   learning,  do  not  occur
automatically. Typical barriers to effective cooperative learning are for example the diffusion of responsibility, social
loafing, the dysfunctional division of labor, or a lack of learning skills on the part of the students (Johnson & Johnson,
1992). Renkl and Mandl (1995) specify important factors that are responsible for the success of cooperative learning: It
depends on the nature of the given task, individual characteristics of the learners (which either support or interfere with
cooperative learning activities) or the reward structure of the learning situation. Yet, the most critical kinds of interventions
aim at fostering learning processes by guiding learners' interactions during collaboration.
One well-known and effective way to evoke learning activities in cooperative settings is to distribute different learning
materials among the learners that should first be worked through individually. The subsequent cooperation task is to teach
the learned material to each other. We label this kind of arrangement peer teaching, assuming that the learning partners
possess similar learning skills but vary concerning the knowledge they acquired in the individual learning phase. Thus, peer
teaching is distinguishable from peer-tutoring arrangements in which partners differ from each other in status and learning
experiences with respect to the content (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 2000).
Peer teaching arrangements evoke learning activities by defining two different roles: the explainer and the learner. While
the role of the explainer generally involves processes like providing information and responding to questions, the learner-
role is defined by activities like asking questions. In this way, peer teaching settings trigger processes of collaborative
knowledge construction in a 'natural' manner. Thereby, both the explainer and the learner may benefit from collaborating.
For the explainer, learning by teaching is a significant mechanism that provides an opportunity to reformulate and extend
knowledge structures. The learner, on the other hand, benefits from the one-to-one interactions in peer teaching settings: He
or she not only gets the chance to immediately ask questions if necessary, but also to receive individual feedback by the
explainer. Empirical findings (e.g. O'Donnell & Dansereau, 2000) indicate that peer teaching is an effective method of
instruction. Yet, it has to be considered that peer teaching is a complex and complicated process of interaction which
demands a great deal of the learners. Therefore, the question is how interaction and collaborative knowledge construction
can be improved in peer teaching settings. At least two possibilities of fostering the interaction processes are conceivable:
(1) supporting learners with content-specific structures which can facilitate the construction of new knowledge and (2)
providing a cooperation  script in order to   evoke conducive   processes   of  collaborative knowledge   construction. Both
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page    381

treatments are considered to be helpful for cooperative learning in general. Therefore we will discuss both strategies in a
broader context that goes beyond the scope of peer teaching settings below.
Pre-structuring   task-specific contents.  In order  to  improve  collaboration   by content-specific    structuring  methods,  the
learners receive some kind of visualization, such as a diagram or a table with central, yet abstract characteristics of the
contents discussed during their collaboration. Fischer, Bruhn, Gräsel, and Mandl (in press, a) present empirical findings
which indicate that content-specific structuring methods can foster processes and outcomes of collaborative knowledge
construction. Dyads which worked with a pre-structured visualization tool not only externalized and elicited more task-
related knowledge, but also benefited with respect to the quality of a collaborative problem solution when compared with
dyads of a control group that received a non-structured visualization-tool. Suthers (in press) compares different kinds of
representations (textual, graphical, and matrix) learners had to work on during collaboration in order to facilitate their
learning processes    and outcomes.   According   to   him,  the variation  in the  features   of  the representational   tools can
significantly affect the learners' knowledge building discourse. We assume that these kinds of content-specific structuring
methods facilitate interaction processes in peer teaching by supporting both the peer in the explainer role and the peer who
takes the role of the learner. They (1) can support the explainer in structuring the contents to be taught and (2) can provide
'anchors' for the learner to integrate the new knowledge.
Providing Cooperation Scripts. One of the most well known techniques which defines roles including specific cognitive
activities is the scripted cooperation technique. It was developed for learning dyads and can be applied to a variety of tasks.
A prototypical cooperation script used with a text comprehension task includes the following steps: (1) Both partners read
the first section of a text, (2) partner A recalls the text information without using the text, (3) partner B provides feedback
without looking at the text, (4) both partners elaborate on the text information, (5) both partners read the second section of
the text, switch roles and continue with steps 1 to 4. Several studies have documented the effectiveness of this technique for
cooperative learning (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1992).
Another well-known instructional method for cooperative learning is reciprocal teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1984). The
reciprocal   teaching technique   designates  roles  that  include   the strategies  questioning,   summarizing,    clarifying  and
predicting (Palincsar & Brown, 1984). Evidence for the effectiveness of these techniques results from numerous studies
(Rosenshine & Meister, 1994). Studies about the effects of cooperation scripts usually compare groups who have been
trained in applying the collaboration strategy with control groups which received no training. Thus, in contrast to methods
merely using resource interdependence to evoke cooperation processes, techniques like scripted cooperation or reciprocal
teaching generally include a prior training for the students working on a cooperation task.
A major advantage of techniques that explicitly aim at scripting cooperation ­ as described above ­ is that they support
learners in effectively interacting with each other. So far, the effectiveness of these techniques has been documented mainly
within face-to-face settings. Our approach is to apply these techniques within a video-conference setting.

Fostering collaborative learning in video-conference settings
Due to the rapid progress in the field of communication technology, video-conferencing is more and more becoming an
application for everyday use and can also be expected to be a helpful extension concerning the design of new learning
environments.    Yet, up  to  now   only a  few  studies  on  video-conferencing    have  raised   the question of    how to foster
collaborative learning in video-conferencing. The question is, to what extent the approaches developed in face-to-face
settings can also be applied to the context of video-conferencing. In general, we believe that interventions that have been
shown to be effective in face-to-face settings as described above can also be helpful for fostering cooperative learning in
video-conferencing. Yet, we also see some differences. Whereas techniques like peer teaching and the provision of content
structures or cooperation scripts can be transferred to video-conference settings, the training of role skills in distance
learning is an obstacle since the learners are located in different places. Yet, net-based learning environments provide the
possibility to implement treatments not only by preliminary training but also by structured interfaces. This implementation
strategy is well known in text-based computer-mediated learning environments. For example, Baker and Lund (1997)
structured   the text-based  communication    among    learners working   together  on  a problem-solving     task by  providing   a
structured   communication    interface  which   included  so-called "communicative      act   buttons". These  buttons   aimed    at
facilitating the  interaction between   the learners   and at encouraging   the learners    to engage    in effective collaboration
activities. Buttons labeled   for instance  with "Where    do we  start?" or "What   should    we   do now?"   tended  to facilitate
coordination  and   evoke   meta-cognitive  processes.   Empirical findings  indicate   that   the structured interface is able    to
promote interactions that enable learners to collaborate effectively on a problem-solving task.

AIMS OF THE STUDY
The aim of the presented study is to investigate two different possibilities to facilitate collaborative knowledge construction
in video-conferencing.    Therefore,  we  arranged   a peer  teaching setting  in  which  two   similarly   experienced   university
students collaborated   on  a  text comprehension    task. Both  learners  were   asked  to  teach  each  other the   contents  of a
theoretical text they had read individually in a preceding text acquisition phase. The two variables varied in the experiment
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   382

were (1) a text-based content scheme including guiding questions to facilitate collaborative text comprehension and (2) a
cooperation script   aiming   at directing processes  of collaborative knowledge     construction.  Both treatments   were not
implemented as a preliminary training of the participants. Instead we pre-structured the shared visual interface the learners
worked on during collaboration. Our research questions are:
·   How does the content scheme influence the learning outcomes in a video-conferencing peer teaching setting?
·   How does the cooperation script influence the learning outcomes in a video-conferencing peer teaching setting?
·   How does the interaction of the content scheme and the cooperation script influence the learning outcomes in a video-
    conferencing peer teaching setting?

METHOD
Setting
The scenario consisted of a desktop video-conferencing system including audio- and video-connection and a shared screen
to support the dyads' knowledge construction. In this way, the setting allowed synchronous verbal communication and joint
creation of text material. The shared application was realized with MS-Netmeeting 3.01. As text-editor we applied MS-
Word 2000, an application that we expected to be well known among our participants and therefore easy to handle. This
technical solution enabled the learners to alternately type or edit notes in the text-editor. Since we de-activated most of the
Word-facilities, the   participants were merely  able to  create text-material. The  creation of tables  or diagrams   was not
possible. The reason for this restriction was to focus the participants' activities on learning-relevant processes by reducing
the amount of non-content talk.

Participants
96 students in   their first semester who  were  enrolled in educational  introductory courses   at the  Ludwig-Maximilians-
University of Munich took part in this experiment. Participation was required for receiving a course credit at the end of the
semester, even   though   learning   outcomes  of the  experimental   session   were not accounted    for   the final students'
performance appraisals. Dyads were set up and randomly assigned to one of four conditions (three experimental conditions
and a control group). Learning partners in general did not know each other before the experimental session. The partners
were seated in two different rooms where they stayed during the experiment. For data analysis we excluded 5 dyads, since
in these groups at least one member had substantial problems with the German language.

Design
The design of the study is shown in Table 1. A 2x2 factorial design was formulated. The two factors were (1) content
scheme and (2) cooperation script. Three experimental groups and a control group were formed. The experiment was
conducted in one session that consisted of two main phases. During the individual text acquisition phase two different
theory texts were distributed, one for each partner. In the following collaborative learning phase, the dyads were asked to
work together using a desktop video-conferencing system to teach the contents of each text to the fellow learner. Thus, each
learner took two roles: the explainer-role when explaining his or her theory to the fellow learner and the learner-role when
receiving information from the partner. Two text documents (one per theory) were provided on the shared screen to allow
the documentation of important discussion contents. In the unscripted/scheme group, the text documents were structured in
such a way that they included several guiding questions stressing the content of that text which were supposed to direct the
dyads' discussion throughout this phase. In the scripted/non-scheme group, the two text documents included instructions
about the explainer- and learner-role in order to effectively direct the learners' interaction. Dyads in the structured/scheme
group worked with text documents that included the guiding questions as well as the cooperation script. Participants in the
unscripted/non-scheme group, which served as control group, worked with two text documents that only included the name
of the particular theory as a headline without any further aids.

Table 1: Experimental design of the study.

       ·                                             Cooperation script

                                                                  Without                           with
          Content scheme                                  unscripted/non-scheme          scripted/non-scheme
                                      without                      group                 group
                                                              (n = 12 dyads)                   (n = 11 dyads)
                                                           unscripted/scheme                  scripted/scheme
                                      with                         group                            group
                                                              (n = 10 dyads)                   (n = 10 dyads)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 383

Content scheme. The content scheme was implemented by a pre-structured shared text document that contained eight
guiding questions. Table 2 shows the questions of the content scheme.
Table 2: Questions included in the content scheme.
                            Theory                                           Empirical Findings
        ·   What are the most important concepts of the        ·       How was the theory examined?
            theory?                                            ·       What   were the results of the empirical
        ·   What are the main ideas of the theory?                 studies?

                         Consequences                                       Individual Estimation
            ·   Which pedagogical interventions can be             ·   What do I like/dislike about the theory?
                concluded from the theory?                         ·   Which    of   my    own      experiences
            ·   Which    limits  of  pedagogical        inter-         support/do not support the theory?
                ventions  can   be  concluded      from  the
                theory?
The structure of the scheme was adopted from Brooks and Dansereau (1983) and adapted in accordance with the purposes
of our study. As can be seen in Table 2, the content scheme was divided into four sections comprising two questions each.
The different sections stressed important aspects including concepts and main ideas of the theory, empirical findings,
consequences and individual estimations regarding the theory. Participants were asked to generate answers to all questions
and write them down in the text document. Both theory texts did not provide any information concerning the questions
regarding the consequences and the individual estimation. By answering these questions, the participants were expected to
draw conclusions that go beyond the scope of the texts.
Cooperation script. Learners in these conditions also received a pre-structured text document. This text document included
a short description of the explainer- and learner-role and directed the learners' interactions during the collaborative learning
phase by defining four steps of interaction: (1) explaining the text material (explainer) and asking comprehension questions
(learner), (2) typing the information received (learner) and supporting the learner (explainer), (3) generating own ideas
concerning the theory (explainer and learner individually), and (4) discussing (explainer and learner) and writing down the
results of the discussion (learner only, see Table 3). An observer, who stayed in one of the two rooms, supervised the
correct application of the specified roles and controlled the time in which the different tasks were to be completed. After the
discussion of the first theory had finished, the partners changed roles and repeated the same procedure, now discussing the
second theory. Time-on-task for each theory was 40 minutes.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 384

Table 3: Steps and learning activities included in the cooperation script.
                                 Explainer                                  Learner

          Step 1                      Explaining the text material             Asking comprehension questions
           (approx. 10 min.)

          Step 2                   Supporting the learner's activities        Explaining and typing the informationreceived in the shared text document
           (approx. 15 min.)

          Step 3                                    Elaborating on text information individually
            (approx. 5 min.)

                  Step 4(approx. 10 min.)Discussing generated ideas with thepartnerDiscussing generated ideas with thepartner and writing the results in theshared text document
Dyads in the unscripted groups received no instructions in structuring their interactions. According to the given time in the
scripted groups, time-on-task for both theories was 80 minutes. The partners in the unscripted groups were able to decide
how much time within this time period they wanted to spend discussing each theory. For example, if they decided to take
50 minutes discussing the first theory they only had 30 minutes left for the second theory.

Text materials
As mentioned   above, two  different theory texts  were   distributed  between   the  two partners  of each  dyad.   Both texts
contained theories associated with   the nature-nurture-debate.  One    partner  read  a  text about "Attribution    Theory" as
developed by Bernhard Weiner, the other one about the "Theory of Genotype-Environment Effects" by Sandra Scarr. Both
texts comprised  approximately 1400   words  each.  The   texts provided    information  on the  foundations of the   particular
theory, its main concepts and on important empirical findings.

Procedure
Introduction and Pretests. At the beginning of the experiment, the dyad partners were seated in two different rooms and
were  informed  about the aims of  the   session. They   were   told  that at first they would   learn about  one theory  with
implications for the nature-nurture-debate individually, while their partner would learn a different theory, also concerning
this topic. The task of the whole session would be to learn two important psychological-pedagogical theories. After that, the
participants received the pretests as described below.
Individual text acquisition phase. In this phase, participants received a text either about the attribution theory or about the
theory of genotype-environment effects. Each learner was informed about his/her task to explain the contents of the studied
text to his/her partner after the individual acquisition phase. Both learners were given 25 minutes to read the text, underline
important parts and take notes of the most important aspects if they wanted to. After that, the participants were given 10
minutes to think about how to explain the contents to their partners.
Collaborative learning phase. Prior to the actual learning interaction, participants were instructed on how to use both the
video-conferencing system and the shared text documents. It was demonstrated how each partner could work on the same
text document. Further, the participants were familiarized with the different tasks they had to accomplish according to the
different conditions. The dyads were told that they should use the text documents as a worksheet providing a basis for
discussion. The cooperation task required both participants to comprehend both theories as deeply as possible.
In all sessions, an observer stayed in one of the two rooms to supervise the correct performance of the particular tasks. In
the scripted conditions, he/she also provided the participants with information about the time and switched from one phase
to another. The collaborative learning phase took 80 minutes.
Posttests. After the collaborative learning phase, the participants were asked to complete three tests assessing their level of
knowledge acquisition. The first test was a free recall-test for which participants were given 10 minutes to summarize both
theories in approximately five sentences each. The second and third tests were the same as the tests conducted prior to the
individual text acquisition phase (short answer- and multiple choice-test). For each test, the participants were given 5
minutes  time for completion. At the  end  of the  experiment,   the  participants   were asked  to  complete a questionnaire
concerning their motivation and the quality of their collaboration.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  385

Data sources
Pretests. At the beginning of the experimental session, the participants were asked to fill out a questionnaire regarding
biographical information and interest, social anxiety, uncertainty orientation, and text-processing strategies. Additionally,
we conducted two knowledge pre-tests (one short answer- and one multiple choice-test) concerning concept-knowledge and
deeper understanding of the theories to be learned. For analyzing the previous knowledge, we computed a combined cued
recall measure consisting of the short answer and the multiple-choice test. In both cued recall tests the highest possible
score was 12 points.
Posttests. The  posttests included    knowledge-tests    regarding  concept-knowledge     and  deeper  understanding  which   were
similar to the pretests described above. Both cued recall tests (short answer and multiple choice) are assumed to measure a
deeper and more detailed understanding of the theoretical concepts and their relations. Again we computed a combined
cued recall measure consisting of the short answer and the multiple-choice test. In both cued recall tests the highest possible
score was 16 points. In addition, the students were asked to take a free recall-test concerning their recall of concepts of the
theories learned during the experimental session. The maximum scores in the free recall tests were 22 points (Attribution
Theory) and   27  points  (Theory     of Genotype-Environment       Effects). Finally, we   asked  the  participants to fill out a
questionnaire regarding their motivation, and the quality of collaboration during the learning session.
Process data.   All experimental    sessions   were    recorded on  videotapes.    Additionally, we   recorded processes   (screen
recording) and outcomes (Word-files) of activities concerning the collaborative representations. All process data serve as
sources for discourse and other process analyses.

RESULTS
In order to control the effects of the pre-knowledge we computed a 2x2x2 Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the cued
recall pretests as dependent measure. The between-groups factors were cooperation role (explainer or learner), content
scheme (with or without) and cooperation script (with or without). Results showed no statistically significant differences
between the groups neither regarding "Attribution Theory" nor "Theory of Genotype-Environment Effects".
In order to check if the two test types (free recall vs. cued recall) used in this study represent relatively independent
knowledge measures, we computed correlations between the different outcomes. In fact, it turned out that the free recall and
cued recall measures in both theories did not correlate significantly: The correlation between free recall and cued recall of
"Attribution  Theory"  was  r   = .06 (n. s.), the  correlation between  free  recall  and cued  recall of  "Theory  of Genotype-
Environment   Effects" was    r =  .04   (n. s.). Yet, we   found that both   free recall measures  correlated significantly.  The
correlation between free recall of "Attribution Theory" and free recall of "Theory of Genotype-Environment Effects" was r
= .22 (p < .05). There was no significant correlation between the two cued recall measures (r = -.06, n. s.). These results
confirm our assumption that the free recall and cued recall measures represent two different types of knowledge. Therefore,
we will treat each knowledge measure separately in our further analyses.
Below, results concerning learning outcomes in the different knowledge tests are presented. For a better illustration the
results are described separately for each theory.

Attribution Theory
In order to analyze effects of the factors cooperation role, content scheme and cooperation script on learning outcomes we
computed a 2x2x2 ANOVA with free and cued recall tests of "Attribution Theory" as dependent measure. Means and
standard deviations of both measures are presented in Table 4. A significant effect of the cooperation role was found for the
analysis of the cued recall score (F (1,78) = 19,78; p < .01). The participants who taught the Attribution Theory information
significantly outperformed    those   who    took  the role of  the learner   (M = 11,03,  SD = 1,91    and M = 8,92,   SD = 2,37,
respectively). Neither concerning the free recall nor the cued recall test no other effects reached statistical significance. That
means that   both treatments    ­ content    scheme  and cooperation   script ­ did   not lead to significant effects on  learning
outcomes concerning "Attribution Theory".
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page 386

Table 4: Results concerning free and cued recall of "Attribution Theory".
                ·                                       Free recall                          Cued recall
                                                           of "Attribution Theory"     of "Attribution Theory"

                                                                 M (SD)                       M (SD)
                             unscripted/non-scheme group        6,58 (5,16)                  11,43 (1,56)
                             unscripted/scheme group            8,00 (4,16)                  10,67 (2,65)
           Explainer         scripted/non-scheme group          7,36 (3,17)                  10,78 (3,36)
                             scripted/scheme group              5,40 (4,67)                  11,21 (3,94)
                             unscripted/non-scheme group        7,55 (3,50)                  9,28 (2,31)
                             unscripted/scheme group            7,90 (3,67)                  8,14 (3,02)
           Learner           scripted/non-scheme group          7,45 (4,95)                  8,94 (1,71)
                             scripted/scheme group              6,00 (4,69)                  9,26 (2,54)
Theory of Genotype-Environment Effects
With respect to the "Theory of Genotype-Environment Effects" we also computed an ANOVA with the factors the factors
cooperation role, content scheme and cooperation script. Means and standard deviations of both measures are presented in
Table 5. Again a significant effect of the cooperation role was found for the analysis of the cued recall score (F (1,78) =
8,15; p < .01). The peers who took the explainer role significantly outperformed those who took the learner role (M = 9,50,
SD = 2,54 and M = 7,93, SD = 2,56, respectively). A slight effect of the cooperation role was also found in the free recall
measure (F  (1,78) =  2,83; p < .1). Again, the explainers outperformed    their partners in the learner  role (M = 10,90,
SD = 3,81 and M = 9,35, SD = 4,29, respectively).
Table 5: Results concerning free and cued recall of "Theory of Genotype-Environment Effects".
                ·                                       Free recall                          Cued recall
                                                         of "Theory of Genotype-       of "Theory of Genotype-
                                                           Environment Effects"         Environment Effects"
                                                                 M (SD)                       M (SD)
                             unscripted/non-scheme group       11,25 (2,73)                  9,19 (2,89)
                             unscripted/scheme group           10,20 (2,97)                  9,31 (1,78)
           Explainer         scripted/non-scheme group         11,91 (4,16)                  9,30 (2,91)
                             scripted/scheme group             10,10 (5,30)                  10,29 (2,52)
                             unscripted/non-scheme group        8,91 (4,78)                  7,15 (3,50)
                             unscripted/scheme group            9,50 (4,03)                  7,28 (1,79)
           Learner           scripted/non-scheme group         10, 27 (3,50)                 9,07 (5,98)
                             scripted/scheme group              8,70 (5,17)                  8,27 (1,70)
Additionally a significant main effect was found concerning the free recall measure with respect to the factor cooperation
script. This effect almost reached the .05 significance level (F (1,78) = 3,27; p = .07). Peers who cooperated in the scripted
conditions outperformed the  participants working  without the cooperation    script (M = 9,23;  SD = 2,46 and  M = 8,22;
SD = 2,77, respectively). No other effects concerning the free and cued recall tests reached statistical significance. Hence,
the content scheme did not show to have significant effects on learning outcomes concerning the "Theory of Genotype-
Environment Effects".
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 387

DISCUSSION
Results show   that peer   teaching  is an   effective mean  for  structuring cooperation     between  two  learners. Obviously,
compared   to traditional  classroom  instruction,  peer teaching   helps students  to actively  engage  in   beneficial learning
processes (Graesser & Person, 1994). Yet, it must be considered that peer teaching supports particularly the learners who
take the role of the teacher. The results presented above clearly indicate these advantages on the explainer's part: In both
theories the peers in the teacher role outperformed their partners who were taught the learning material. These results
correspond to findings of studies that also focussed on peer teaching (e.g. O'Donnell & Dansereau, 2000). At least two
reasons can be assumed for explaining the teachers' advantages. First, the better outcome performance can be ascribed to
the higher amount of time on task that the explainers received due to individual acquisition of the material to be taught. The
second explanation refers to the relevance of the so called generation effect. Due to the generation effect overt verbal
activity leads to better recall of information than listening to it (Slamecka & Graf, 1978). Therefore, learners who get the
chance to explain knowledge to others in particular benefit from cooperative learning. The design of this study does not
permit to decide which of both interpretations is more relevant. Yet, when findings of other studies are taken into account,
both factors (more time-on-task and higher level of activation) should be responsible for the advantages on the teacher's
part (cf. Lambiotte et al., 1988).
The results of this study showed no significant effects of the content scheme on learning outcomes. Therefore one might
deny the relevance of this treatment. Yet, this conclusion is precipitate when considering (1) the learning activities evoked
by the content scheme and (2) the knowledge tested in the outcome measures. The content scheme supported students
particularly in elaborating on the learning material. Elaborations are assumed to mainly facilitate long term retention since
they help connecting the learned material to the knowledge base. That means that the effects of the content scheme might
have failed to appear because of testing the outcomes immediately after the learning session. Perhaps advantages of the
content scheme would have appeared if learning outcomes had been tested again at a later time. Unfortunately, this was not
possible for organizational reasons.
In contrast to the  content   scheme  the  cooperation   script showed  significant   effects on learning   outcomes.  However,
advantages  of the  scripted  groups    only occurred   concerning  the cued   recall  measure   of the "Theory    of Genotype-
Environment   Effects".   One reason  for  the advantages   of  the cooperation script only   in one   theory might   be that the
effectiveness of the cooperation script is tied to the level of difficulty of the studied theory. A comparison of the outcomes
of the two cued recall tests shows that the score of the "Theory of Genotype-Environment Effects" is lower than the score
of the "Attribution Theory". This lower score indicates a higher degree of difficulty of the first theory. Therefore, the
conclusion can be drawn that the cooperation script only shows effects with more complex learning material.
At present we can only present results concerning learning outcomes. In order to gain deeper insight in mechanisms of the
varied treatments additional analyses of learning processes are needed. Therefore we are currently working on a category
system for discourse analysis. According to the assumptions described in the theoretical framework, the categories include
content-related and process-related aspects. The content-related aspects refer to activities concerning the coordination of the
collaboration activities, the discussion  of  text material and  the  elaboration on   information  of  the text. Process-related
aspects comprise activities concerning elicitation, externalization, and conflict- or consensus-oriented negotiation of on-task
contents as well as the distribution of task-related activities among learners (such as writing down information in the shared
document). We assume that such a detailed analysis of discourse will enable us to reveal critical factors correlated with
recall performance.

REFERENCES
Baker, M., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of Computer Assisted
        Learning, 13, 175-193.
Brooks, L. W. & Dansereau, D. F. (1983) Effects of structural schema training and text organization on expository prose
        processing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 811-820.
Bruhn, J. (2000). Förderung des kooperativen Lernens über Computernetze. Prozess und Lernerfolg beim dyadischen
        Lernen   mit Desktop-Videokonferenzen       [Fostering  cooperative   learning in computer     networks.  Processes   and
        outcomes of dyadic learning in video-conferencing]. Frankfurt am Main: Lang.
Cohen,  E.  G. (1994).    Restructuring  the classroom:   Conditions  for  productive  small   groups.  Review    of  Educational
        Research, 64, 1-35.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. (1996). The evolution of research on collaborative learning. Oxford:
        Elsevier.
Doise, W., & Mugny, W. (1984). The social development of intellect. Oxford: Pergamon.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (1998). Collaborative knowledge construction with mapping tools (Research
        Report No. 97). Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Institute of Educational Psychology.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  388

Fischer, F.,  Bruhn,   J., Gräsel, C.,   & Mandl,  H.  (in press,  a). Fostering  collaborative  knowledge  construction   with
         visualisation tools. Learning and Instruction.
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (in press, b). Kooperatives Lernen mit Videokonferenzen: Gemeinsame
         Wissenskonstruktion     und   individueller  Lernerfolg   [Cooperative   learning  with video-conferencing   systems:
         Collaborative knowledge construction and individual learning outcomes]. Kognitionswissenschaft.
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2000a). Being there or being where? (Research Report No. 122). Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians-
         University, Institute of Educational Psychology.
Fischer, F.,  &   Mandl,   H.   (2000b). Knowledge    convergence    face-to-face and   in an videoconferencing   environment
         (Research Report No. 123). Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Institute of Educational Psychology.
Graesser, A. C., & Person, N. K. (1994). Question asking during tutoring. American Educational Research Journal, 31,
         104-137.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1992). Positive interdependence: Key to effective cooperation. In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz
         & N. Miller (Eds.), Interaction in cooperative groups: The theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 174-199).
         New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
King, A. (1994). Guiding knowledge construction in the classroom: Effects of teaching children how to question and how
         to explain. American Educational Research Journal, 31, 338-368.
Lambiotte, J. G., Dansereau, D. F., O'Donnell, A. M., Young, M. D., Skaggs, L. P. & Hall, R. H. (1988). Effects of
         cooperative script manipulations on initial learning and transfer. Cognition and Instruction, 5, 103-121.
O'Donnell,   A.   M., &  Dansereau,   D.   F. (1992). Scripted cooperation  in  student  dyads:  A method   for  analyzing and
         enhancing    academic   learning  and  performance.   In  R.  Hertz-Lazarowitz  &   L.  Miller (Eds.), Interactions in
         cooperative   groups.  The  theoretical  anatomy   of group   learning   (pp. 120-141). New    York,   NY: Cambridge
         University Press.
O'Donnell, A. M., & Dansereau, D. F. (2000). Interactive effects of prior knowledge and material format on cooperative
         teaching. The Journal of Experimental Education, 68, 101-118.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and comprehension-monitoring
         activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Renkl,   A., &    Mandl,   H. (1995).  Kooperatives    Lernen:  Die   Frage nach   dem   Notwendigen    und   dem   Ersetzbaren
         [Cooperative learning: The question concerning necessary and replacable conditions]. Unterrichtswissenschaft, 23,
         292-300.
Rosenshine, B., & Meister, C. (1994). Reciprocal teaching: A review of the research. Review of Educational Research, 64,
         479-530.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1993). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal of the Learning
         Sciences, 3, 265-283.
Slamecka,    N.J. &   Graf,  P. (1978).  The   generation  effect: Delineation  of a   phenomenon.  Journal   of  Experimental
         Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4, 592-604.
Suthers, D. D. (in press). Towards a systematic study of representational guidance for collaborative learning discourse.
         Journal of Universal Computer Sciences.
Webb, N. M. (1991). Task-related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small groups. Journal for Research in
         Mathematics Education, 22, 366-389.
