Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  389

        Using Tools and Resources in Computer Supported
                                        Collaborative Writing
                   Gijsbert Erkens, Gellof Kanselaar, Maaike Prangsma, Jos Jaspers
                                              Dept. of Educational Sciences
                                         Utrecht University, The Netherlands
                                                  G.Erkens@fss.uu.nl
ABSTRACT
The relationship between collaboration processes, task strategies and the use of the tools and resources that the computer
environment offers, may be crucial for the effects of computer supported collaborative learning. We are interested to find
out how, within a computer environment, students collaborate, how they use the different tools we offer and how this
influences the quality of the final product. A custom-made computer-supported environment (TC3) was implemented that
enables pairs of high school students to collaborate in writing an argumentative essay. The essay had to be convincing and
based on authentic information sources. TC3, a groupware program, offers the students as task related and communicative
tools: a shared text editor, a chat facility, access to relevant sources of information and a private notepad. Furthermore,
some facilities or tools were offered that might promote collaboration on the task: access to the chat history, adaptability of
the display layout, marking and searching in information sources and counting the number of words in the shared text.
From our analyses we may conclude that the tools and resources the students use during collaborative writing seem to
reflect the writing strategies they adhere to and that the use of these tools and resources in the different phases of the
collaborative writing process is related to the argumentative quality of the final product. Future research will focus on the
effects of  adding tools   for text planning  and linearization to  the TC3  environment    on the coordination   processes  of
collaborative writing.

Keywords
Computer supported collaborative writing, tools, resources, argumentative writing

INTRODUCTION
A recent Dutch educational law has transformed the curriculum in the last three years of college preparatory high school.
Among the changes, schools are required to provide support for students to do increasingly independent research, in order
to prepare them better for college studies. Working and learning actively, constructively and collaboratively are seen as
important parts of this program. The computer-supported, collaborative writing environment that we are developing is
meant   to fit within this new  program.  Through   its active  and interactive nature, the Information   and Communication
Technology (ICT) involved can emphasize both the constructivist and collaborative aspects of the curriculum.
Computer    and   telematics-based   environments  seem   especially  suited  for collaborative  learning by   the variety   of
possibilities they possess: they integrate multimedia information sources, data processing tools and communication systems
(time and   place independent)   in  a single working   environment  (Bannon,   1995,   Van  der Linden,  Erkens,  Schmidt   &
Renshaw,   2000).  Computer    Supported  Collaborative  Learning   systems  (CSCL)   are assumed   to have   the  potential to
enhance the effectiveness of peer learning interactions (Dillenbourg, 1999). As for the role of computers in education, the
focus is on the construction of computer-based, multimedia environments: open learning environments that may give rise to
multiple authentic learning experiences (Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt, 1994). The cooperative aspect is
mainly realized by offering computerized tools, that can be helpful for collaborating students in solving the task at hand
(e.g., the CSILE-program of Scardamalia, Bereiter & Lamon, 1994; the Belvèdere program of Suthers, Weiner, Connelly &
Paolucci, 1995). These tools are generally one of two kinds: task content related or communicative. Task related tools
support the performance of the task and the problem solving process (Teasley & Rochelle, 1993). Communicative tools
give access to collaborating partners, but also to other resources like external experts or information sources on the Internet.
In this respect, the program functions as a communication medium (Henri, 1995). Programs that integrate both functions
are generally known as groupware: they are meant to support collaborative work by sharing tools and resources between
group members and by providing communication opportunities within the group and with the external world. In complex,
open problem solving tasks students will have to decide when and where to use the task related and communicative tools
and resources   during the  process  of collaboration   within the  groupware   environment. Furthermore,  they   will have  to
coordinate the use of shared tools and discuss their application.

COLLABORATIVE ARGUMENTATIVE WRITING
Writing clearly is an open task. Writing texts of any length has been shown to be a complex process in which several
interrelated sub-processes can be distinguished, each with its own dynamics and constraints (Rijlaarsdam & Van den Bergh,
1996). We conceptualize writing argumentative texts mainly as a knowledge-construction (Galbraith, 1999) and problem-
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page  390

solving  task. In  this  task, several  informational  units  from  internal or  external sources   must   be generated,   selected,
collected, related to each other, and organized in a consistent knowledge structure. Furthermore the problem of convincing
the reader by finding a persuasive ordering of arguments and contra arguments must be solved. This entails quite a few
skills, among which social, cognitive, rhetorical, and cultural.
The main advantage of collaborative writing, compared to individual writing, is the presence of a workspace where the
writers can receive immediate feedback. Argumentation by itself, according to Stein, Caliches & Bernas (1997), facilitated
learning  because  it necessitates  searching   for  relevant  information   and using  each  other  as  a source    of knowledge.
Furthermore,   the discussions   generated   by  the  activity make   the collaborators   verbalize  and   negotiate many     things:
representations, purpose, plans, doubts, etc. Collaborating writers have to test their hypotheses, justify their propositions,
and make their goals explicit. This may lead to progressively more conscious control and increased awareness of the
processes (Giroud, 1999).

Planning argumentative texts
Theories of writing (Hayes & Nash, 1996) generally distinguish three types of activities in the writing process: planning
(generating, organizing and linearizing content), formulating or translating (writing the text) and revising. Planning an
argumentative text is a type of task whereby arguments need to be generated and ordered based on one's position and the
audience's needs. Unlike in storytelling, the order of the content of an argumentative text does not inherently follow from
the order in which events take place. During planning activities, ideas will probably be conceived and organized in a very
different manner than in time ­ for instance, in argument clusters. Hence, linearization of the contents is needed before the
ideas can be expanded into text, and again when a text is re-organized. Linearization, therefore, is an important part of
argumentative writing (Levelt, 1989). Research at our department showed that an explicit parting of the idea organization
and  linearization phases  during   planning    leads to an   improvement    of  the quality of an   argumentative   text  (Coirier,
Andriessen & Chanquoy, 1999). It was apparent that converting the conceptual representation of ideas into linear text is a
crucial problem for the writer who is producing argumentative texts. The proposed environment will endeavor to support
students during these two phases with an ICT environment in which tools for conceptual organizing and linearization are
integrated.
Much previous research has concerned itself with examining preplanning. Preplanning refers to planning activities that
occur before the actual writing of the text. Such research has shown that preplanning can have a favorable effect on the
quality of the text (Andriessen, Coirier, Roos, Passerault & Bert-Erboul, 1996). It is known that inexperienced writers
seldom   do preplanning   (Alarmargot,   1997).  Moreover,     because of  a lack of  knowledge   of   the issues involved,    when
preplanning does occur in novices it is more likely to be a superficial sort of brainstorming, which is actually not much
more than simple content-activation based on the terms used in the assignment. Bereiter & Scardamalia (1987) found this to
be true for children. Torrance, Thomas, & Robinson (1996), likewise, found little idea generation based on rhetorical
demands during preplanning for adult undergraduates (relative novices). Rather, their idea generation made a better match
with a simple content-activation model. Also, the number and originality of ideas in the draft were not correlated with time
spent preplanning. Preplanning for writing informational or argumentative texts, however, largely consists of searching,
reading and annotating external information sources.
Lacking preplanning skills, supporting online planning becomes especially important for inexperienced writers. By online
planning we mean the monitoring activities that occur during writing based on goals set, ideas, expectations and strategies
(Van der  Pool,   1995).  These   activities direct the  process of   knowledge  construction   during  writing.  Online   planning
activities, unlike preplanning, are generally linked more strongly to the local organization of the text. Preplanning, at least
in experts, is more concerned with global issues like setting goals and determining overall organization and genre. In earlier
research, the transition between preplanning processes and writing the actual text was found to be a stumbling block.
Kozma (1991), Scardamalia & Bereiter (1985, 1987), and Schriver (1988) all found positive effects of teaching preplanning
on the amount and/or the quality of preplanning, but not on the quality of the written text. The problem can lie in the
linearization or the translation processes, both transitional processes.
In collaborative writing the partners will have to agree on both the content and the ordering of the text. Thus, reflecting on
transitions becomes a natural process. Furthermore, the use of resources will have to be coordinated and discussed. In
previous  research,   in which   college   undergraduates    selected arguments   and   produced    an argumentative     text while
collaborating in a groupware environment, differences in the argumentative discussion were found to correlate with the
representation of the source material. It was found that in a task where the arguments appeared as pictures, more inferences
were needed    to  deduce  the  usefulness   of the   information. The  students  discussed   more   new   arguments    in the chat
discussion and more new arguments in their common argumentative text (Andriessen, Erkens, Overeem & Jaspers, 1996).
Having to put the pictures into words must have helped. Thus, the constructive activities of organizing, linearizing as well
as translating to the common text will have to take place in mutual deliberation, necessitating verbalization and reification
of ideas. This  negotiation,   arriving at a  shared  knowledge    construction  and  common    task strategy, takes    place in the
collaboration dialogue between the partners (Erkens, Andriessen & Peters, submitted). The expectation is that more mutual
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  391

coordinating activities in the   dialogue result in a more     consistent, shared knowledge structure and in a better mutual
problem solution, that is a better argumentative text (also see Baker, 1999). Furthermore, computer support for content
generation, organizing and linearization will help to make these planning activities explicit and negotiable. We are currently
examining these two expectations in the COSAR project. This paper will focus on the question how students use and
coordinate their use of tools and resources in the process of collaborative writing, and how the use of these tools and
resources relates to the quality of the final written product.

COSAR PROJECT
In the COSAR project (COmputer Supported ARgumentative writing) we study electronic collaborative text production
with respect to the relationship between characteristics of interaction on the one hand and learning and problem solving on
the other (http://eduweb.fss.uu.nl/cosar).     A  groupware     program    (TC3:  Text  Composer, Computer     Supported  &
Collaborative) was developed that combines a shared text editor, a chat facility and private access to internal and external
information resources to foster the collaborative distance writing of texts. The project was meant for pairs of students (16-
18 years old) working together in writing argumentative essays in the context of the Dutch language curriculum. The
assignment was to choose a position pro or contra a current topic (cloning or organ donation) and to write a convincing
argumentative text addressed to the Department of Public Health. The texts had to be based on recent articles from well-
known newspapers published on the Internet. Each partner worked at his/her own computer.
The basic environment consists of four main windows (see Figure 1):
INFORMATION (upper right): This private window contains tabs for the task assignment and the information sources.
Each student has different sources. Relevant parts of the sources can be highlighted, and the search button (bottom toolbar)
allows students to cycle through the marked parts. On request of the teachers, copying and pasting from the information
sources was disabled.
NOTES (upper left): A private notepad in which the student can make personal notes. Copying and pasting from the notes
to the shared text is possible.
CHAT (lower left): The chat window is shared and WYSIWIS (`What you see is what I see'). The lower chat box is for the
student's current contribution; the other shows the incoming messages of his partner. The scrollable window holds their
past dialogue: the chat history. Copying and pasting from the chat is disabled.
SHARED TEXT (lower right): A text editor (also WYSIWIS') in which the shared text can be composed by taking turns
with a turn-taking device. Turn taking is regulated by a traffic light (bottom toolbar). One student has the green sign and
can write in the text, the other has a red sign. The student with the green sign can pass on his turn by clicking on the traffic
light. The partner will get the green light and can then write in the text. A student with the red light who wants to write, can
ask for the turn by clicking the traffic light. Both lights will turn to yellow and flash, signaling that the turn has been asked
for. A word count button (bottom toolbar) can be used to count the number of words the text contains. It is possible to copy
and paste from the shared text into the notes.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page       392

                                    T

Furthermore, the students can change the layout, that is, resize the windows, of the basic TC3 environment by layout
buttons (bottom toolbar). For reading information sources and making private notes the information window and the notes
window can be enlarged. Another layout button will enlarge the lower windows (chat and shared text) for emphasis on the
communicative and shared tools. The layout buttons change the layout of the TC3 environment individually. The last
button in the bottom toolbar is the stop button. With the stop button the students can stop their collaborative work and
continue at a later time. The students work on a text for about 6 hours, in most cases in 3-4 sessions on separate days.
Clicking the stop button automatically saves all work in progress that is, all text, notes, highlights and chat history.
The program keeps a log file in which all actions in the separate windows and the chat discussion history are saved. This
log file may be used to literally replay all keystrokes and thus the full collaboration between the students. The log file is
also used to construct an activity and chat dialogue protocol for data analysis.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS
In a first study 40  pairs of    students  from  two  College Preparatory  High   schools (VWO)    have written one       or  two
argumentative texts on the topics cloning and organ donation in the basic TC3 environment. The evaluation of the students
showed that, although criticizing technical flaws and drawbacks of the program (mainly in the first session), they were
rather satisfied with this way of computer-supported collaborative learning.
In a second study, we have experimentally added two planning tools (a diagram visualizing the argumentative structure and
an outliner function for the     text) in order to determine the effect of sharing  these tools on the  argumentation      in the
discussion and on the resulting argumentative text. In this study 120 pairs of students from six schools participated. We are
currently analyzing the results from the second study.
In this paper we will discuss results on three research questions in the context of the first study in the COSAR project:
·       How do students use the tools and resources in order to coordinate their collaborative writing?
·       How does the use of tools and resources relate to the argumentative quality and structure of the resulting text?
·       Does the use of tools and resources differ in different phases of the writing processes, i.e. before and during the
     actual writing of the text?
In the next section we will discuss the method of analysis we are using to study the coordination of the collaborating
students of the use of tools and resources during planning and writing the argumentative texts. In the following section we
will present quantitative results on the three research questions. In the last section we will discuss some conclusions and
further analyses we are planning to do.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page    393

METHOD OF ANALYSIS
Chat and activity protocol
Process oriented research in general is very laborious and consists of two consecutive analyses: a) single case analyses of
protocols of the processes, and b) comparison of quantitative or qualitative characteristic features of the processes in the
protocols that have been analyzed. If several protocols are to be compared, this can be an enormous task. We try to reduce
the effort of protocol analysis by using the computer program MEPA (Multiple Episode Protocol Analysis), developed in
our department at the University of Utrecht. The use of tools and resources is recorded by TC3 in a full action, keystroke
based protocol. These protocols are automatically compressed into basic actions and converted into a MEPA data file. The
actions with regard to tools and resources that are logged in the protocols are shown in Table 1.
                              Table 1. Actions categories for use of tools and resources
    Actions       Description                              Actions       Description
    Chat          Chatting                                 To-manual      Opening the TC3 manual information
    Layout        Using a layout button                    To-notes       Activating the notes window
    Mark-source   Marking in an information source         To-source      Opening a information source
    Stop          Clicking on the stop button              To-text        Activating the shared text window
    To-assignment Opening the assignment information       Turn-ask       Asking for a turn shift by clicking the traffic light
    To-chat       Activating the chat window               Turn-give      Giving the turn by clicking the traffic light
    To-chat history Activating the chat history window     Word count     Clicking on the shared text word count button

Argumentative quality and structure of the texts
We measured text quality with four measures and their mean score. Textual structure refers to the absence or presence of
the formal units ­ introduction, body, and conclusion ­ and their composition. Segment score measures the quality of the
argumentation at segment level ­ segments roughly coinciding with paragraphs. The argumentation score concerns the
argumentative quality of the text as a whole, including introduction and conclusion. The audience score consists of three
parts: presentation, level of formality, and empathy. Finally, the mean score of these four measures was computed for each
text. Interrater agreement on five papers by two raters varied between 74-87% on these scores, resulting in satisfying
Cohen's kappa's between .69 and .79. This grading of argumentative quality was accomplished separately and blind to the
grades the teachers gave the papers following their own criteria.

Phases of collaborative writing
There are two points in the writing process that can be clearly distinguished: the first draft and the final draft. In between,
one or more drafts are written. We have used these two drafts as anchors. The first phase refers to the period in the chat and
activity protocol before writing the first draft, and so reflects the preplanning phase. The rest of the protocol is divided into
two phases of equal duration. We expect the second phase to be characterized by more writing activities and the third phase
by more revising activities. However, we view the three phases as units of time, not as specific activity periods.

RESULTS
Using tools and resources for coordinating collaborative argumentative writing
Our first question was: How do students use the tools and resources in order to coordinate their activities in writing an
argumentative text? Table 2 shows the mean percentages and standard deviations for activation of the different tools and
resources in the protocol. On average, the collaborative writing protocols contained 994 actions. Almost two thirds of these
actions refer to the chat tool. It shows the crucial role that task oriented chat plays in coordinating the collaboration process.
The next highest percentages are as we expected: using the shared text tool (11%) and reading the sources (6%). Counting
the number of words in the shared text (5%), giving and asking for turns (4%) and marking in the information sources (2%)
occur rather regularly if we take the total number of actions into account. The students seldom use the layout buttons, work
in the notes or read the program manual.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page                                   394

                Table 2. Total number of actions, mean percentages and standard deviations in the protocols
               Actions                        Mean          SD   Actions                          Mean          SD
               Chat                          62.47%       9.70   To-manual                         .25%         .31
               Layout                          .82%         .93  To-notes                          .98%        1.12
               Mark-source                    2.30%       2.98   To-source                        6.37%        2.98
               Stop                            .34%         .41  To-text                         11.18%        2.59
               To-assignment                  1.18%         .69  Turn-ask                         1.42%         .86
               To-chat                        3.46%       1.89   Turn-give                        3.06%        1.58
               To-chat history                1.32%         .84  Word count                       4.85%        2.08
                                                                 Total number of actions          993.75     349.09

Is the use of tools and resources related to the quality of argumentative texts?
In this section we will describe the relations we found between tool and resource use frequencies and the scores for the
argumentative   quality    of the texts. Table 3 shows    the   correlations  between  the  action  categories and   each                                    of  the
argumentative text scores.
We did not find significant correlations for textual structure, nor for overall argumentation. However, we found several
significant correlations for each of the other text scores. The quality of the segments correlates negatively with the total
number of actions (-.38). This seems to be an overall tendency, as this category also shows negative correlations for
audience score (-.20) and the resulting mean score (-.24). This could mean that long chat and activity protocols result in
lower quality  texts.  In  other  words,  switching between     tools and   criss-crossing the computer   environment                                      might be
detriment to the production of a high quality text, possibly because the students do not focus efficiently on the task at hand.
In line with this possibility, we found that paragraph argumentation (segment score) correlates positively with to-text (.28).
This strengthens the theory that paying closer attention to the text may lead to a better text, in this case at the segment level.
However, we did not find correlations for to-text with any of the other text scores. Note that a high frequency of to-text does
not imply that students also write in the shared text. It seems plausible that focusing on the shared text is an important
influencing factor.
                       Table 3: Correlations between action percentages and text scores for all phases.
                               Textual        Segment           Argumentation           Audience             Mean
                              Structure        score                  score                score              score
      Chat                           .01             -.07                      .03                .17                .05
      Layout                        -.08             -.09                     -.16                -.25*             -.19°
      Mark-source                    .01             -.01                     -.05                .05               -.00
      Stop                           .16             -.01                      .03                -.06               .02
      To assignment                 -.02             .06                       .05                -.05               .03
      To chat                       -.01             .03                      -.02                -.17              -.05
      To chat history                .10             .05                       .07                -.07               .04
      To manual                     -.02             .12                      -.05                -.01               .00
      To notes                       .14             -.00                      .09                .08                .09
      To source                     -.09             .07                      -.09                -.19°             -.10
      To text                        .13             .28*                      .03                .03                .12
      Turn ask                       .07             -.11                     -.05                -.17              -.09
      Turn give                     -.07             -.06                     -.02                -.26*             -.12
      Word count                    -.11             -.10                      .05                -.09              -.05
      Total no. of actions          -.08             -.38**                   -.14                -.20°             -.24*
** Pearson correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed); * significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed);° significant at the 0.10 level (2-tailed).
The audience score correlates negatively with layout (-.25), to-source (-.19), turn-give (-.26), and total number of actions (-
.20). Somehow, focusing on these activities seems to draw the students' attention away from their readers. Finally, the
mean score ­ which is the mean of the other four scores ­ correlates negatively with layout (-.19) and the total number of
actions (-.24). Again, text quality seems to be influenced by the length of the protocol and by focusing on the program
rather than the writing task.

Differences in the use of tools and resources in different phases of the writing processes
The differences in use of tools and resources in the three phases of the collaborative writing process are visualized in two
graphs in Figure 2 and Figure 3. Figure 2 shows the mean percentages of all actions in the three phases. The mean number
of actions for each of the phases is 163.0 (sd.=103.1), 402.1 (sd.=206.8), and 428.6 (sd. =174.0), respectively.
            Mean %
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page 395

                   80.00%

                   70.00%

                   60.00%                                                                                Chat
                                                                                                         Mark-source
                   50.00%                                                                                To-assignment
                                                                                                         To-chat
                                                                                                         To-chat history
                   40.00%
                                                                                                         To-notes
                                                                                                         To-source
                   30.00%                                                                                To-text
                                                                                                         Turn-give
                   20.00%                                                                                Word count

                   10.00%

                    0.00%
                                   Phase 1                Phase 2                Phase 3

                                       Figure 2. Trend graph including all action categories.

As can be seen in Figure 2, the chat activity relatively dominates in all three phases. The chat percentage clearly decreases
(from 67% to 58%) and then increases again (from 58% to 64%): during preplanning and the final phase the students spend
more time deliberating than during the highly productive middle phase. This is consistent with the findings by Kraut,
Galegher, Fish and Chalfonte (1992), who found that subjects sought more frequent and richer communication during
planning and revision phases than during the more solitary activity of drafting the text.
For better readability the chat action is excluded from the graph in Figure 3. As can be seen in this chart several action
categories show       a constant declining  tendency, and often    for obvious reasons.  The   categories mark-source     and  to-
assignment are both activities naturally performed during the initial stages of the writing process. After all, when students
leave marking sources and reading the assignment to the final phase, it will be too late to change the text. On the other
hand, some  categories     show   a rising tendency:  to-text, and word-count.   Again,  this is hardly surprising,  as  these are
activities naturally performed when the actual writing and revising are in full progress and the goal ­ that is, finishing the
text ­ draws nearer. The mean differences for total number of actions show that the preplanning phase is a lot shorter than
the other two phases that differ only slightly.
We found four categories showing a rising-then-falling tendency: to-chat, to-chat-history, to-notes, turn-ask, and turn-give.
The latter might be explained by a change in co-operation between the students. At first, there is no reason to ask for turns,
because there is nothing in the shared text yet. Later on, as they grow more familiar with the program and each other, the
students start     asking for turns in the  chat window   instead  of  using the turn-ask  button  for  this purpose.    From  our
observations we can confirm that most students seem to prefer this verbal communication to the flashing yellow screen
caused by a turn-ask. However, the student evaluation showed that on average the students liked the turn taking system. For
obvious reasons, virtually no to-chat-history is logged in the first phase. As the chat history grows, it can be used as a
source: all arguments and viewpoints discussed earlier can be reviewed there. This explains the increased use of this
window in the second phase. However, during the last phase there is less need for consulting the chat history, as the outline
of the text has been clearly laid out by that time.
              Mean %
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                 page   396

                     16.00%

                     14.00%

                     12.00%

                                                                                                                                                             Mark-source
                     10.00%                                                                                                                                  To-assignment
                                                                                                                                                             To-chat
                                                                                                                                                             To-chat history
                      8.00%                                                                                                                                  To-notes
                                                                                                                                                             To-source
                                                                                                                                                             To-text
                      6.00%                                                                                                                                  Turn-give
                                                                                                                                                             Word count

                      4.00%

                      2.00%

                      0.00%
                                             Phase 1                                Phase 2                                Phase 3

                                                        Figure 3. Trend graph excluding chat category

The tendency for to-notes can be explained with very similar reasons: the students read the sources first, before they start
taking notes on them. The decrease between the second and third phases is caused by the fact that towards the end of the
assignment all sources will have been read and annotated. The students know what is in their notes by then, and so they do
not need to refer to them very often anymore during revision. However, reading ­ writing ­ taking notes ­ writing ­
revising does not seem to be the logical approach to planning and writing texts. It makes sense to take notes before starting
to write the text, because you need to know about the content of the sources before you write about them. The students in
this control group, however, only started to take notes extensively after they had already started writing the first draft.
Finally, to-chat was logged most frequently during the middle phase, and less frequently during the other two phases. This
category was logged whenever a student clicked in the chat window without actually entering chat before moving on to a
different window. The tendency for to-chat is in line with the tendency for chat: during the second phase, relatively fewer
to-chats resulted in chat, thus resulting in a falling-then-rising tendency for chat.

DISCUSSION
This study posed research questions with regard to: a) the use of tools and resources by students in the TC3 groupware
environment to coordinate their collaborative writing process, b) the relationship between the use of tools and resources and
the quality          of the  written text, and          c) the differences in               the use of tools and resources              during different               phases   (i.e.
preplanning, writing and revising) of the writing process. So what is the relationship between the frequencies of tool use in
the three phases of the writing process and the quality of the resulting text?
As we can see in the charts above, there are clear differences between the phases. However, the use of the chat facility is
most frequent in all three phases. In a further analysis of the topics the students chat about, we found that 47% of the chat is
about planning of the writing task on a meta-cognitive level, 36% of the topics are content related and 17% of the topics is
not task related, social chat. Planning activities on a meta-level occur equally in all three phases of the collaborative writing
process for low, medium and high quality texts. Discussion of specific content clearly occurs more often in the high quality
text groups. Furthermore, we find that the higher the performance, the lower the occurrence of non-task, social chats.
In the pre-writing phase the students clearly make more use of the information sources, marking them and taking notes.
Further analysis showed that to-source and to-notes frequencies in the first phase are, in fact, positively correlated to
respectively the segment score (r =.36) and the textual structure (r =.22) scores. In the second phase of actual writing of the
text the students show more activity in the shared text window and in the turn-giving device. Further correlation analysis
showed a significant positive correlation between to-text frequency and the textual structure score (r = .33), the segment
score (r=.45) and the argumentation score (r=.21). The third phase of writing shows an increase of chat activity, of text
activity and of word-count. In the correlation analysis for the third phase only a small correlation is found between chat
activity and the audience score (.19).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 397

In our further analyses we will focus on the way the students explicitly discuss their use of tools and resources in the chat
discussion. Furthermore, we will investigate the effects of adding tools for text planning and linearization to the TC3
environment on the coordination processes in collaborative writing.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Marije van Amelsvoort for her help in these analyses.

REFERENCES
Alamargot, D. (1997). Processus de récuperation et d'organisation dans l'activité de redaction de texte. Effet de l'acquisition
        des connaissances réferentielles. These Doctorat de Psychologie. Université de Poitiers.
Andriessen, J.E.B., Coirier, P., Roos, L., Passerault, J.M., & Bert-Erboul (1996). Thematic and structural planning in
        constrained argumentative text production. In H. Van den Bergh, G. Rijlaarsdam & M. Couzijn (eds.) Theories,
        Models and Methodology in writing research (pp. 237-251). Amsterdam: University Press.
Andriessen, J.E.B., Erkens, G., Overeem, E., & Jaspers, J. (September, 1996). Using complex information in argumentation
        for collaborative text production. Paper presented on the First Conference on Using Complex Information Systems
        (UCIS'96), Poitiers, 3-6 Sept 1996.
Baker, M. (1999) Argumentation and constructive interaction. In J.E.B. Andriessen & P. Coirier (Eds.) Foundations of
        Argumentative Text Processing (pp. 179-203). Amsterdam: University Press.
Bannon, L.J. (1995). Issues in Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. In C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer Supported
        Collaborative Learning (pp. 267-283). NATO ASI Series, Vol. 128, Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (1994). From Visual Word Problems to Learning Communities: Changing
        Conceptions of Cognitive Research. In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and
        Classroom Practice (pp. 157-201). Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Coirier, P., Andriessen, J.E.B., & Chanquoy, L. (1999). From planning to translating: The specificity of argumentative
        writing. In J.E.B. Andriessen  &  P. Coirier  (Eds.), Foundations  of argumentative   text   processing (pp. 1-29).
        Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Dillenbourg, P.  (1999). Introduction: what   do  you  mean   by    "Collaborative Learning"?    In: P. Dillenbourg   (ed.),
        Collaborative Learning: Cognitive and computational aspects (pp. 1-19). New York: Pergamon.
Erkens, G., Andriessen, J.E.B., & Peters, N. (submitted) Interaction and performance in computer supported collaborative
        tasks. To appear in H. Oostendorp, Cognition in a Digital World. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Galbraith, D. (1999). Writing as a knowledge-constituting process. In: M. Torrance & D. Galbraith (eds.), Knowing what to
        write: conceptual processes in Text Production (pp.139-159). Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Giroud, A. (1999).  Studying argumentative   text processing  through  collaborative writing. In: J.E.B. Andriessen   & P.
        Coirier (eds.), Foundations of argumentative text processing. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Hayes, J.R., & Nash, J.G. (1996). On the nature of planning in writing. In C.M. Levy & S. Ransdell (Eds.), The Science of
        Writing (pp. 29-55). Mahwah, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Henri, F. (1995). Distance learning and computer mediated communication: Interactive, quasi-interactive or monologue? In
        C. O'Malley (Ed.), Computer supported collaborative learning (pp. 145-165). NATO ASI Series, Vol. 128. Berlin:
        Springer.
Kozma, R.B. (1991). The impact of computer-based tools and embedded prompts on writing processes and products of
        novice and advanced college writers. Cognition and Instruction, 8, 1-27.
Kraut, R., Galegher, J., Fish, R., & Chalfonte, B. (1992). Task Requirements and Media Choice in Collaborative Writing.
        Human-Computer Interaction, 7, 375-407.
Levelt, W.J.M. (1988). Speaking: from intention to articulation. Bradford Books, MIT press, Boston MA, USA.
Rijlaarsdam, G., & van den Bergh, H. (1996). The dynamics of composing - An agenda for Research into an interactive
        compensatory model of writing : Many questions, some answers. In C.M. Levy & S. Ransdell (Eds.), The Science
        of Writing (pp.107-125). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1985). The development of dialectical processes in composition. In D. Olson, N. Torrance,
        & A. Hildyard (Eds.). Literacy, language and learning: the nature and consequences of reading and writing (pp.
        307-329). New York: Cambridge University Press .
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                page 398

Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M (1994). The CSILE Project: Trying to Bring the Classroom into World 3. In K.
       McGilly (Ed.), Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and Classroom Practice (pp. 201-229). Cam-
       bridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Schriver, K.A. (1988). Teaching writers how to plan: which planning heuristics work best? Paper presented at the meeting
       of the American Educational Research Association, St. Louis, MO, USA.
Stein, N.L., Bernas, R.S., & Calicchia, D. (1997). Conflict talk: understanding and resolving arguments. In : T.Giron (ed.)
       Conversation: cognitive, communicative and social perspectives. (Typological studies in language, volume 34).
       Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Suthers, D., Weiner, A., Connelly, J., & Paolucci, M. (1995). Belvedere: Engaging students in critical discussion of science
       and public policy issues. In: Greer, J. (Ed.). Artificial Intelligence in Education (pp.266-273). Charlottesville, VA:
       AACE.
Teasley, S., & Rochelle, J. (1993). Constructing a joint problem space: The computer as tool for sharing knowledge. In S.P.
       Lajoie, &   S.J. Derry (Eds.) Computers as Cognitive Tools (pp. 229-257). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
       Associates.
Torrance, M., Thomas, G.V., & Robinson, E.J. (1996). Finding something to write about: strategic and automatic processes
       in idea generation. In C.M. Levy and S. Ransdell (Eds.): The Science of Writing (Pp 189-205). Mahwah, NJ:
       Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
