Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page 399

Getting in on the (Inter)Action: Exploring Affordances for
    Collaborative Learning in a Context of Informed
                                             Participation
                                                     Hal Eden
                             Center for LifeLong Learning & Design (L3D)
                                           University of Colorado at Boulder
ABSTRACT
Although considerable attention in the CSCL community has been on distributed-, Web-, or distance-learning applications,
there is evidence suggesting that much of learning, particularly in open-ended problem-solving activities based on tacit
information, does not occur in isolation but in face-to-face settings. This has led our research to explore ways to develop
technologies and media that enhance participation, collaboration, and learning in face-to-face, copresent settings.
This paper explores the history of our research on developing such technologies in the context of our Envisionment and
Discovery Collaboratory at the Center for LifeLong Learning & Design at the University of Colorado at Boulder, and
discusses my research on interface design to support learning and participation in collaborative settings.

Keywords
Interface design, augmented reality, atoms and bits, participatory design, face-to-face interaction

INTRODUCTION
Considerable attention in the CSCL community has been on distributed-, Web-, or distance-learning applications. Certainly,
it is appropriate to explore the new landscape that is opened by the removal of barriers of required copresence, and to
understand the far-reaching implications of ready access to widely dispersed sources of information. However, there is
evidence suggesting that much of learning, particularly in open-ended problem-solving activities [Arias, 1996] based on
tacit information [Collins et al., 2000], does not occur in isolation but in face-to-face settings. Indeed cooperative learning
advocates Johnson and Johnson include face-to-face interaction as one of the key features of their approach in which
students discuss, teach, and explain to each other in promotive ways that "assist, encourage, and support each other's efforts
to learn" [Johnson & Johnson, 1994]. Although it is may be possible to support such interaction at a distance, my research
is exploring ways to develop technologies and media that enhance participation, collaboration, and learning in face-to-face,
copresent settings.
Often the ability to access new, abundant stores of information is seen as a major breakthrough. However, for learning
situations where the answer does not exist, access to all existing answers may be of little use. This is particularly true when
the information needed to resolve a problem is tacit--part of the life experiences of multiple individuals who are impacted
by the problem or may have crucial insights to bring to bear. Our work focuses on design problems that are typically
"wicked" [Rittel & Webber, 1984]--ill-defined, ill-structured, unique, no completion criteria, no single "right" answer,
large universe of solutions and potential steps, each problem may be a symptom of another problem, and whose solution
path is strongly influenced by framing. Resolving such problems involves drawing on various viewpoints and perspectives
and requires collaborative learning where participants learn from each other. In such situations, access to information alone
is not sufficient [Arias et al., 1999].
It is also important to realize what the goals are for learning in a particular situation. Whereas much learning is focused on
acquiring the skills and expertise necessary to operate within a domain in some competent, expert, or professional role,
there are many situations where the goals for learning are quite different. Music appreciation does not necessarily have the
goal of nurturing musicians, but of allowing people to enjoy the context, history, and to recognize various forms of music.
Science and Technology Literacy has the goal of allowing a broader segment of the population to make these domains
meaningful to their everyday lives--not necessarily to "do science." Our research has been exploring ways to support and
encourage a similar form of learning in the area of citizen participation in decisions that affect their lives.

A CONTEXT FOR CITIZEN PARTICIPATION IN DESIGN
How can more than 261 million individual Americans define and reconcile their needs and aspirations with community
values and the needs of the future? Our most important finding is the potential power of and growing desire for decision
processes that promote direct and meaningful interaction involving people in decisions that affect them. Americans want to
take control of their lives.[PCSD, 1996]
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  400

For citizens to have greater say within their community and for communities to benefit from the valuable insights that its
citizens have to contribute, individuals need to become engaged in activities for which they have often had no training and
in which they may have no desire to act in an expert or professional capacity.

Focus: Informed Participation
The key challenges for moving toward new forms of citizen participation include (a) addressing the paradox that citizens
cannot really be informed unless they participate, yet they cannot really participate unless they are informed [Brown et al.,
1994]; and (b) understanding that participation has limits that are contingent on the nature of each citizen's situation, the
issues, the problems, and the institutional designs [Arias, 1989], as well as the available technology and media. However, a
benefit of coming to grips with these challenges is that informed participation leads to ownership and a stronger sense of
community.

Collaborative work vs. collaborative participation
Much of the focus on computer-supported collaborative work has been on using technology to support existing work
cultures, i.e., communities of practice (CoPs) [Brown & Duguid, 1991; Wenger, 1998], which consist of practitioners who
work as a community in a certain domain undertaking similar work. Some examples of CoPs are architects, urban planers,
research groups, and software developers.
Even approaches aimed at interdisciplinary activities have tended to proceed from the assumption that those engaged in the
activity are highly skilled in their respective field. However, the goal of collaborative participation is often different.
Communities of interest (CoIs) [Fischer, 2001] bring together stakeholders from different CoPs, as well as those who may
not be members of any established CoP to solve a particular (design) problem of common concern. Two examples of CoIs
are (1) a team interested in software development that includes software designers, marketing specialists, psychologists,
programmers, and users; and (2) a group of citizens and experts interested in urban planning who are concerned with
implementing new transportation systems.
CoIs are characterized by their shared interest in the framing and resolution of a design problem. CoIs often are more
temporary than CoPs: they come together in the context of a specific project and may dissolve after the project has ended.
CoIs have great potential to be more innovative and more transforming than a single CoP if they are able to exploit the
"symmetry of ignorance" [Rittel, 1984] as a source of collective creativity. Although there is a need to become informed
about a domain in order to participate in design, decision-making, and input-giving processes, the goal is not generally to
become more of an expert in the domain nor to become a member of the culture of the domain. The goal is to gain enough
of an appreciation for the domain to be able to communicate with members of that culture while retaining the valuable
views and perspectives from the participant's culture.
Fundamental challenges facing CoIs are found in building a shared understanding of the task at hand, which often does not
exist at the beginning, but is evolved incrementally and collaboratively and emerges in people's minds and in external
artifacts. Members  of CoIs must communicate        with and learn from others    [Engeström, 2001] who        have different
perspectives and perhaps a different vocabulary for describing their ideas. Learning within CoIs is more complex and multi-
faceted than legitimate peripheral participation [Lave & Wenger, 1991] in CoPs, which assumes that there is a single
knowledge system towards whose center newcomers move over time.
Learning in CoIs requires externalizations [Bruner, 1996] in the form of boundary objects [Star, 1989] that have meaning
across the boundaries of individual knowledge systems. Boundary objects allow different knowledge systems to interact by
providing a shared reference that is meaningful within all systems. Computational support for CoIs must enable mutual
learning through the creation, discussion, and refinement of boundary objects that allow the knowledge systems of different
CoPs to interact. The interaction between multiple knowledge systems is a means to turn the symmetry of ignorance into a
resource for learning and social creativity.

A BRIEF HISTORY: EXPLORING SUPPORT FOR INFORMED PARTICIPATION
We have found that an effective approach for understanding how to support participation is to look at other domains and
how they have approached the problem. One of the foundations for our work on supporting collaborative participation is in
the approaches pioneered by our urban planning colleague, Ernesto Arias, in the creation of physical simulations and games
for use in fostering community participation and as learning tools for students in that domain [Arias, 1994].
Although our work focuses primarily on the processes our technologies must embody and interact with in order to support
informed participation, it is impossible to create systems that operate solely at that abstract level. What we need is the
context of a specific design domain to act as an "object to think with" and allow us to build a particular concrete instances
to demonstrate the ideas and goals of our approaches. Urban design and planning is an ideal domain for this purpose as it
gives rich domain content and environments as well as models of processes for design, problem solving, and interaction
among people.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page  401

Physical Simulations & Games in Urban Planning
                                                            As early as 1984 [Arias, 1984], this research recognized that
                                                            early    phases   of  design   operate    with  what    are   known  as
                                                            potential environments--abstract representations of "the way
                                                            things    could    be"   such  as  plan   drawings     and    maps  that
                                                            experienced     designers     manipulate   with    considerable    ease.
                                                            However,     involving    user communities     in  the  design  process
                                                            requires communicating these potential environments to those
                                                            communities who may not be as skilled at working with these
                                                            abstract representations. This approach began to use effective
                                                            environments       to  address    this  problem.    (In   the   planing
                                                            literature,    the    term  "effective    environments"       connotes
                                                            physical   and    social  environments    as   people  experience   and
                                                            define them. This is not a claim that these environments are
                                                            effective   for   some   specific goal.)  Whereas     physical  models
                                                            have been used extensively to display potential environments,
                                                            they    were not   generally   used  as effective   environments--to
                                                            draw    participants   into interaction   with  the models    and  with
                                                            each    other   and    to  support   new   forms    of  learning    and
                                                            creativity.
                                                            There    are   many    examples     of    this approach--a      notable
                                                            example     is the   Cole   Neighborhood     Redevelopment      Project
                                                            [Arias,   1996].   In  this project,   models   of  the neighborhood
                                                            were collaboratively constructed providing citizens a way of
                                                            participating in the design process by interacting with problem
                                                            through physical models (see Figure ).
                                                            There were some limitations for this environment. It included
                                                            computational      support    through   a geographical      information
                                                            system    (GIS)    "on the  side;"  however,    it was  not   integrated
                                                            into the model. This caused a change in focus from the face-
  Figure 9: The Cole Neighborhood Redevelopment             to-face interaction around the model to the GIS when issues
                           Project                          appropriate     to that   system   arose,  resulting   in   a cognitive
                                                            interruption.     The  system  provided    no   means   to    model the
                                                            dynamics       of  the    neighborhood    or    the   design   process.
Information generated in the process of the design sessions had to be manually gathered and recorded, which limited the
ability to reuse and build on previous work.
The unique nature of each neighborhood required construction of a new model to match that particular situation. However,
the creation of effective environment models can be viewed as developing languages of design that support human-to-
human interaction, similar to Alexander's pattern language approach [Alexander et al., 1977]. From this perspective, many
components and issues specific to these neighborhoods can be generalized and used to support learning in community,
classroom, and design studio settings. This led to the creation of
games that modeled the processes that took place (in the form of
game rules) and reused the languages (the game pieces) that were
developed in the neighborhood settings.
The Mr. Roger's Sustainable Neighborhood board game [Spencer
et al., 1997], developed by urban design students, is an instance
of such a game (see Figure 8). By abstracting issues from real
situations such  as Cole   neighborhood,   the  game   confronted
players    with  decisions  on     the  social,   economic,     and
environmental   decisions that are faced  in addressing issues  of
neighborhood development. In this game, participants take turns
navigating  through the   neighborhood   and  are presented  with
various community    design decisions   (should a parking   lot be
added here, should a neighborhood focus be created there) that
the players address as a neighborhood team.                           Figure 8: Mr Roger's Sustainable Neighborhood
The game supports learning in that it exposes students to issues of                           board game
community    development   and  to  the  challenges of  achieving
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page   402

consensus in a community. However, the game situations are static and there is no support for extended exploration of the
issues facing the players, which limits learning potential.

Computational simulations
As we began to explore how computational media might learn from and contribute to this work, an initial effort was made
                                                                      to explore how computational simulations could be used
                                                                      to enhance the board game approach. As a result, the Mr
                                                                      Roger's    Sustainable   Neighborhood      simulation   game
                                                                      [Perrone  et al., 1997]  was   created   (see Figure 9). The
                                                                      game  board  became    a dynamic     simulation that updates
                                                                      neighborhood situations based on decisions made by the
                                                                      players. Web   support   allowing    the players  to  explore
                                                                      information and argumentation related to the issues they
                                                                      face enhances the learning experience.
                                                                      However, the face-to-face, around-the-table nature of the
                                                                      board  game   was  displaced   by  a computer   environment
                                                                      that more  naturally  supports  one  person   "driving" while
                                                                      others look over that individual's shoulders.
                                                                      Based on the experiences and observations from creating
                                                                      these physical and    virtual environments,   we  determined
                                                                      that it would be useful to develop an approach to draw on
                                                                      the complementary nature of the strengths and weaknesses
                                                                      of both forms of media (see Table 4).
 Figure 9: The Mr. Roger's Sustainable Neighborhood
                       simulation game                                The Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory
                                                                      (EDC)
                                                                      After  some   initial  experiments    with    how horizontal
worksurfaces and projection systems could be used to accomplish our goals, we developed the EDC (shown in Figure 10).
By using a horizontal electronic whiteboard, participants work "around the table," incrementally creating a shared model of
the  problem.   They  interact  with   computer   simulations  projected    onto the    worksurface  by   manipulating  the   three-
dimensional,  physical objects    that constitute a  language  for  the domain     [Arias,  1996;   Ehn, 1988].  The  position and
movement of these physical objects are recognized by means of the touch-sensitive projection surface. In Figure 10, users
construct a neighborhood through the use of a physical language appropriate for the problem by placing on the worksurface.
This construction is a description of the setting of concern to the stakeholders and becomes the boundary object through
which they can collaboratively evaluate and prescribe changes in their efforts to frame and resolve a problem. In the upper
half of  Figure  10, a second     vertical electronic  whiteboard   presents   information   related to  the   problem-at-hand  for
exploration  and extension.  In   the  figure, a  user is filling out a survey   constructed   from  the  model  presented  on  the
horizontal worksurface. The results of this survey are stored (for future exploration) and are also fed to the simulation,
where the ramifications of the decisions specified in
the survey can be explored. This work is described in
more  detail in [Arias et  al., 2000]  and more   issues
related to this paper  are discussed   in  [Arias et al.,
1999].

                                                                   Figure 10: The Envisionment and Discovery
                                                                                     Collaboratory
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                        page    403

      Table 4: Complementary strengths and weaknesses of physical and virtual environments and associated
                                         implications for learning (based on [Arias et al., 1997]).

  Weaknesses of Computational                     Complementary Strengths of                  Potential learning support
  Simulations                                     Physical Games & Simulations                through combination
     user must learn and work the interface         direct, naïve manipulability andintuitive understandingfrom learning about the interface tolearning about the domain and theproblem
     (sans haptics) little or no tactilefeedback    tangible, tactile interaction                 manipulative learning
     individual interaction with computer theusual focus (either each with owncomputer or one person driving sharedsystem)mediation of communication andsocial interaction through1.common focus2. forms of "body language" inmanipulation of physicalsocial interaction and collaborativelearning
     complex modeling needed to realize all         natural constraints of physical objects      constraints can provide structure to
     constraints                                    (boundaries of the physical enforced)        learning, can point out conflicts
  Weaknesses of Physical Models                   Complementary Strengths ofComputational Simulations
     models passive, static representations,
     behavior not easy to visualize, all            well-suited for dynamic models and           learning aided by dynamic models
     interpretation of meaning and dynamics         visualization of behavior                    and visualization
     by users
     automatic feedback on consequences of          dynamic models can reflect the results       learning by understanding
     decisions not provided                         of decisions                                 consequences of decision
     fidelity to reality limited due toproblems such as scaling. Alternaterealities not easy to modellearning effects of scale andvirtual models can span scales andinteractions between levels of scales,constraint systemslearning in alternate realities, relaxedconstraints
     management and capture of information          can capture information and designis difficultresults for analysis and future useassessment tools, seeds for learningcan be built upon, evolved, andreseeded

Informal assessment of the EDC.
We have used this system in numerous demonstrations of our work to transportation planners, urban designers, community
members, researchers, and other visitors. The current state of development both at an overall system level and from the
standpoint of low-level interaction has made it impractical to deploy in realistic settings as was our initial goal. However, in
the context of our demonstrations, we have engaged the observers as pseudo-participants asking them to perform some
basic design interactions and have observed several aspects of the interaction that pose limitations to the usability of the
system. These observed limitations include
   ·   The touch-screen technology of the SmartBoard was designed for single-user-at-a-time (single cursor) interaction.
       This required that users take turns (simultaneous actions created error situations, e.g., a row of houses between the
       two touches rather than just two single houses).
   ·   The use of an interaction style characterized as "select-object/select-action/perform-action" causes the user to have
       to "work" the interface. This led to frequent "mode" errors [Lewis & Norman, 1986] (e.g., the user tried to delete
       an object when the "add" mode was active). Certainly, there are alternate interaction techniques that could lessen
       the   overhead   for the   users,    but the single-cursor limitation      still requires that a linkage  be  made  between        the
       physical cursor and the current virtual object and allows only one object type to be active at a given moment.
   ·   The user had to take explicit action to make the physical-virtual connection by pressing the object onto the touch
       screen rather than just placing it on top of it.
   ·   Taken together these require the user to have a more abstract mental model of the interface to guide how they
       interact    with the system.       Often  this model is   separate   from    their  model   of   how  the   domain  object     being
       manipulated should behave. Although individuals who are continuously engaged in these sorts of activities may be
       willing to learn this model as they work with the system, participants who have limited exposure to the system
       may not have the opportunity to form that model and may be left out of interaction. The challenge is to make it
       more accessible to them.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                     page   404

FOCUSING ON INTERACTION ISSUES TO PROVIDE ACCESS FOR LEARNING
As   Table 4 describes, there   are  many  ways  that  the  blending    of the physical   and   the virtual  could   create    improved
interaction for learning. Based on our assessment of the EDC, the most critical aspects necessary to make that environment
available to users in realistic situations is to make the interface more accessible to participants. Specifically, the advantages
of physical elements for naïve manipulability and mediation of communication will be the focus for the remainder of this
paper. Others of the issues raised there are discussed elsewhere (e.g., [Scharff, 2002]) or will form the basis of future work.
Using a DGT Electronic Chessboard, we have created prototypes
of the  Participate-in-the-Action    Board (PitA-Board,    see Figure
11). The underlying technology consists of an 8-by-8 sensor grid
that can   determine   the   location  and identity    of 15   distinct
transducers.
The    new  forms  of  interaction    support that   this  technology
provides include
     ·   Multiple    "points  of  control"    rather  than  a  single
         interaction cursor.
     ·   Sensing   pieces  automatically   when    placed   on  board
         (rather than needing to explicitly press the piece onto the
         surface).
     ·   Parallel  interactions   (rather  than  single-threads    of
         interaction   and   errors   when    multiple  simultaneous                   Figure 11: The PitA-Board
         accesses are attempted)
These interaction capabilities form the basis for our initial investigation into direct and natural interaction techniques aimed
at improving accessibility to our simulation environments.

Naïve manipulability
Utilizing the multiple "points of control" provided by the PitA-Board allows us to create a broader repertoire of direct
interaction styles more closely tuned to the type of domain object being represented. For example some interactions that
might be useful in the domain of transportation are
1.Tracking   behavior: the   virtual representation  follows  the physical   piece  (this could    represent  an  individual    moving
 through the space or an object whose location is subject to change)
2.Placing (Rubber stamp) behavior: placement of physical piece creates a virtual representation that remains when physical
 piece is removed (used to place items with known, fixed location--a house, store, or school)
                                                                           1.Drawing    behavior:   piece   is  used   to   trace out a
                                                                             series of  points    that  make   up    the  object  being
                                                                             created. (e.g., a road, a bus route--see Figure 12)
                                                                           3.Launching behavior--placing a dynamic item: the
                                                                             physical  piece    indicates the  initial location   of  an
                                                                             object that  has   dynamic   behavior--if      appropriate,
                                                                             the virtual object begins its dynamic behavior from
                                                                             that point. (e.g., bus, auto)
                                                                           In  addition   to the   interaction  attached    to domain-
                                                                           grounded    objects,   there  will  still be  the   need  for
                                                                           interaction pieces that support control or inspection
                                                                           of  the environment.     For  example,    by   having   some
                                                                           virtual   representations      that   no      longer    have
                                                                           corresponding     physical   pieces  (such    as a  "placed"
                                                                           object)  means    that  there  needs  to  be  some   way   to
     Figure 12: This multiple-exposure photo shows the user                indicate that  the   virtual  representation     needs to  be
     tracing out a bus route (enhanced for clarity) using a bus-           removed   when    it is no  longer  needed,    which   might
                        route-drawing object.                              require  an "eraser"    piece. A   magnifying     glass may
                                                                           be useful in some contexts to examine the attributes
                                                                           of an object.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   405

The underlying idea is that the system allows the creation of affordances that are more natural to the situation being
modeled and the design process being supported by the technology. The examples that are given here are only for purposes
of illustration and were developed in an ad hoc manner (though based on observation of prior interactions) to demonstrate
the concept. Future work will involve interaction with use communities to determine what affordances are best suited to the
needs of users and to develop a repertoire of objects for a particular domain.

Mediation of Communication
In Arias' work with physical games and models it was observed that the physical pieces often become extensions of the
speaker, allowing the speaker to provide emphasis or to extend her/his body language. In the hybrid environment, we
envision that interaction using physical objects will allow the speaker to project that sense of extension into the virtual
space.
By supporting a group interaction with the simulation, it is no longer just a user-computer interaction, but the environment
becomes a form of media supporting conversations among participants (i.e., human-human communication mediated by the
artifact) as well as collaborative "conversations with the material." [Schön, 1992] In this regard, the ability to interact in
parallel becomes an issue. The question could be raised whether a conversational paradigm really requires parallelism and
that problems with that aspect of the current interface might not be better mitigated by using concurrency control (e.g.,
locking or other turn-taking approaches).
Certainly, a top-level view of the conversational paradigm is one of turn taking based on a need (especially in larger
groups) to avoid everyone talking at once so that participants can hear and be heard. However, a finer-grained inspection of
conversations reveals that they are not strictly based on turn taking. Sometimes there are back-and-forth volleys as meaning
and understanding are negotiated and grounding is achieved [Clark & Brennan, 1991]. Extra-verbal utterances (gestures,
nods, shrugs, hyphenated glances) certainly happen without turn taking--and are also important parts of conversational
grounding.
Furthermore, not all group interaction is conversational--there may be situations in which participant input could happen in
tandem (e.g., a group leader asks everyone indicate where their house is in the neighborhood and each person places their
house).
It seems  that the   goal for interaction   with    the computational  environment   is to match     the characteristics of the
interface/medium  as  closely as possible   to the  characteristics of the rest of the  face-to-face environment. It is  highly
doubtful that anyone would bring a group of people into the same room and then ask them to use the telephone to talk to
each other. The availability of parallelism provides a means to tune the interaction to the needs of the situation but does not
imply that all interactions must occur in parallel.

Emerging opportunities for future evolution
The development of new ideas and approaches are generally accompanied by corresponding limitations that need to be
acknowledged and understood. These limitations do not necessarily represent flaws or barriers to the use of this approach,
but need to be understood as opportunities for further development and evolution.
By introducing multiple physical objects into the interface, they now have to be kept track of (where did that bus-drawing
object go...?). In a completely virtual environment, the palettes organize tools and objects very neatly so that they, as well
as the single physical object (the mouse), are generally easy to keep track of. A possible solution might be to create a
"storage tray" to organize and keep track of the items.
This could also impact how many interaction objects one could manage. For example, in virtual palettes, there can be
techniques, such as pop-ups or multiple palettes that provide access to a large number of tools/objects. Attempting to
provide more and more features under this approach would create an unmanageable proliferation of physical cursor objects.
On the other hand, the general goal of our approach is not upon an "experts" interface where every feature that anyone ever
wanted is available--rather on a participant/learner interface, where the features important to the task at hand are there and
directly accessible.
One could also argue that this approach violates some well-known principles of interface design, such as consistency of
interaction: Why does this piece have one sort of behavior and another act differently? As I have discussed, I believe this is
a desirable feature, but I would think that careful application of this feature--matching the behavior with the sort of object
represented--is critical to its success.
There are also limitations based on the specifics of the "borrowed" technology. Since it was designed specifically as a
chessboard, the granularity of resolution is coarse. Even so, the interface appears to be surprisingly effective. This may
because the interactions of groups in design settings are usually not focused on fine-motor tasks. The grid technology also
produces dead spots when the piece is at the edge of a square or placed between two squares, which is problematic in our
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   406

system since the domain being modeled may not fit as neatly into a grid representation. The current system has a limited
number of distinct sensors, which makes it difficult to have a large number of objects and track them reliably.
In our current system, we have tried to emphasize the grid outline to decrease the occurrence of problems, but it is not
completely successful. These experiences with limitations will serve to guide future developments to better meet the goals
that we have for participant interaction.

Related Work
Although the focus of this paper has been on the history and development of our current research and its implications for
learning, it is important to acknowledge that it has been strongly influenced by a broad, rich research landscape. The
perspective of ubiquitous computing movement [Abowd et al., 1998; Weiser, 1991] toward "breaking out of the desktop
box" gave an initial, powerful impetus to think about how physical models could be enhanced by computation in varied
ways. The importance of the tangible nature of physical interaction and its interaction with computations is underscored by
the tangible media [Ishii & Ullmer, 1997] and graspable interfaces [Fitzmaurice et al., 1995] work. There are many efforts
underway to address issues related to shared interfaces such as the Collaborage [Moran et al., 1999] and DiamondTouch
[Dietz & Leigh, 2001] projects.

CONCLUSIONS:
This paper presents some promising approaches to interaction that focus on needs of face-to-face interaction among a group
of users. Although it has been based on multiple prototyping cycles, there is still a need for closer evaluation and evolution
with user communities.    Limitations  that  we have  encountered   have resulted    in  tradeoff decisions, but strong initial
indications that this may be well suited to face-to-face participant interaction.
Future work on this system includes assessment in more realistic settings using role-playing scenarios and application to
actual community settings (e.g., the design of a new local bus route). Throughout these interaction with use communities
there will be continued evolution of interaction techniques and studies of how the evolving systems supports participation
and learning.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Gerhard Fischer, Ernesto Arias, Andy Gorman, Eric Scharffe, and Kyle Bygott for their collaboration
in the development of the EDC concepts and prototypes and for feedback on drafts of this paper. Ben Bulsink of DGT
Products, NL has been extremely helpful in providing us with materials to continue to develop the PitA-Board further. All
of the members of L3D have provided encouragement and feedback in the continued development of this work, which has
been supported by NSF grants REC-9631396 and CDA-9529549 and the Coleman Family Initiative.

REFERENCES
Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M., Jacobson, M., Fiksdahl-King, I., & Angel, S. (1977) A Pattern Language:
        Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford University Press, New York.
Arias, E. G. (1984) "Resident Participation in Public Housing: A Conceptual Approach," In Vogt & Mickle (eds.), Part 1:
        Geography-Regional Science, ISA, Research Triangle Park, NC, pp. 131-138.
Arias, E. G. (1989) "The Contingent Nature of Participation and Housing Research.," Guru Nanak Journal of Sociology--
        Special Housing Policy Issue, 10(1-2), pp. 81-99.
Arias, E. G. (1994) "Decision Support in Locational Analysis: An Integrated Approach," Proceedings of GIS '94, pp. 129-
        143.
Arias, E. G.  (1996) "Bottom-up    Neighborhood    Revitalization: Participatory   Decision Support  Approaches   and Tools,"
        Urban Studies Journal--Special issue on Housing Markets, Neighborhood Dynamics and Societal Goals, 33(10),
        pp. 1831-1848.
Arias, E. G. & Eden, H. (1997) "InterSim: Supporting Face-to-Face Collaborative Design," Proceedings of CSCL '97.
Arias, E. G., Eden, H., & Fischer, G. (1997) "Enhancing Communication, Facilitating Shared Understanding, and Creating
        Better  Artifacts by Integrating    Physical  and Computational   Media      for Design,"  Proceedings   of Designing
        Interactive Systems (DIS '97), pp. 1-12.
Arias, E. G., Eden,  H.,  Fischer, G.,    Gorman, A., &   Scharff, E. (1999) "Beyond      Access:  Informed  Participation and
        Empowerment," Proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL '99) Conference, pp. 20-
        32.
Arias, E. G., Eden, H., Fischer, G., Gorman, A., & Scharff, E. (2000) "Transcending the Individual Human Mind--Creating
        Shared Understanding through Collaborative Design," ACM Transactions on Computer Human-Interaction, 7(1),
        pp. 84-113.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 407

Brown, J. S. & Duguid, P. (1991) "Organizational Learning and Communities-of-Practice: Toward a Unified View of
         Working, Learning, and Innovation," Organization Science, 2(1), pp. 40-57.
Brown, J. S., Duguid, P., & Haviland, S. (1994) "Toward Informed Participation: Six Scenarios in Search of Democracy in
         the Information Age," The Aspen Institute Quarterly, 6(4), pp. 49-73.
Bruner, J. (1996) The Culture of Education, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. E. (1991) "Grounding in communication," In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley
         (eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition, APA Books, Washington, D.C., pp. 127-149.
Collins, A., Neville, P., & Bielaczyc, K. (2000) "Toward a Design Theory of Media for Education," International Journal
         of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11, pp. 144-162.
Ehn, P. (1988) Work-Oriented Design of Computer Artifacts, Almquist & Wiksell International, Stockholm, Sweden.
Engeström,   Y. (2001) "Expansive  Learning  at  Work:  toward      an activity theoretical reconceptualization," Journal of
         Education and Work, 14(1), pp. 133-156.
Fischer, G. (2001) "Communities of Interest: Learning through the Interaction of Multiple Knowledge Systems," 24th
         Annual Information systems Research Seminar In Scandinavia (IRIS'24), Ulvik, Norway, pp. (in press).
Johnson, D. W. & Johnson, R. J. (1994) "Cooperative learning in the culturally diverse classroom.," In R. A. DeVillar, C. J.
         Faltis, & J. P. Cummins (eds.), Cultural Diversity in Schools: From Rhetoric to Practice, State University of New
         York Press, Albany, pp. 57-73.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge University Press, New
         York.
Lewis, C. H. & Norman, D. A. (1986) "Designing for Error," In D. A. Norman & S. W. Draper (eds.), User Centered
         System Design, New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ,
         pp. 411-432.
PCSD--President's Council on Sustainable Development (1996) Sustainable America: A New Consensus for Prosperity,
         Opportunity,  and  a Healthy   Environment for  the Future,     President's Council  on Sustainable Development,
         Washington, D.C.
Perrone, C., Spencer, S., & Arias, E. (1997) "Mr. Roger's Sustainable Neighborhood: A Visual Language Case Study for
         Community Education," In Visual Languages '97 (Capri, Italy), pp. forthcoming.
Rittel, H. (1984) "Second-Generation Design Methods," In N. Cross (ed.), Developments in Design Methodology, John
         Wiley & Sons, New York, pp. 317-327.
Rittel, H. & Webber, M. M. (1984) "Planning Problems are Wicked Problems," In N. Cross (ed.), Developments in Design
         Methodology, John Wiley & Sons, New York, pp. 135-144.
Spencer, S., Perrone,  C., &  Goldstein, M. (1997)  "Mr. Roger's     Sustainable  Neighborhood,"  In Environmental   Design
         Research Association Conference (EDRA) (Montreal, Canada), pp. 126-127.
Star, S. L. (1989) "The Structure of Ill-Structured Solutions: Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem
         Solving," In L. Gasser & M. N. Huhns (eds.), Distributed Artificial Intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
         Inc., San Mateo, CA, pp. 37-54.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice -- Learning, Meaning, and Identity, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England.
