Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   408

       Learning Via Distributed Dialogue: Livenotes and
                             Handheld Wireless Technology
                        Alastair Iles, Daniel Glaser, Matthew Kam, John Canny*
                     (iles@nature + dcg@cs + mattkam@cs + jfc@cs).berkeley.edu
                                         University of California at Berkeley
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces a new learning technology for in-classroom and remote learning. The system and practice is called
"Livenotes" and is motivated by the empirical success of peer learning methods, and by theoretical considerations of
distributed dialogue among student peers as a facilitator of learning. The technical part of Livenotes is a collaborative
whiteboard running on wireless handheld computers. We describe the system and the affordances we have developed for it
to support the distributed dialogue model. We then examine the interactive dialogue that resulted from two classroom trials,
using transcript captures, and analyze how users developed ways to navigate between pages, organize space on screens,
determine whether the system was operational, and create social rapport. Finally, we suggest several issues that researchers
can consider in designing collaborative software.
keywords
Livenotes, peer learning, distributed dialogue, shared whiteboard, collaborative note-taking, wireless handheld.

INTRODUCTION
Peer  discussion is one of  the most    potent facilitators of classroom   learning. Several previous   studies  of collaborative
learning via computer support ­ such as the Distributed TVI experiments at Stanford (Dutra et. al. 1999) ­ suggest that
fostering peer dialogue through technological aids can lead to better outcomes than traditional in-class instruction. They
also show that ­ as in a synchronous newspaper editing system (Tanikawa et. al. 1999) ­ groups of students can work
together to solve problems more effectively through peer dialogue with ample feedback and interactions than with a single
central authority directing the process. They imply that seemingly non-sequitur conversation during less structured peer
dialogue can actually lead to greater attention and thought by students. In addition, there is extensive evidence that learning
is facilitated in small groups (e.g. Resnick et. al 1991; Slavin 1990).
These facts motivate further exploration of distributed dialogue during in-class learning. Livenotes is such an exploration.
Developed by Matthew Kam at the Department of Computer Science at the University of California at Berkeley, Livenotes
uses wireless communication and handwriting to allow a real-time conversation within a small group of students during a
normal lecture, independent of the number of students in the physical classroom. We have tested this software in two
graduate classes ­ one a lecture and the other a seminar ­ which we report on here. The program was originally designed
for small groups of students to carry on a live discussion during the course of a lecture or presentation to supplement what
they  were  learning directly  from the  instructor. Later,    after user testing,  we noticed   that the technology  would   be
appropriate for other kinds of discussion settings. Along with our pre-designed practice, we observed the emergence of a
rich new practice among the users of Livenotes as they developed ways to communicate and coordinate their note-taking.
Following  an  introduction to  Livenotes, this  paper  looks  at how   learning   depends on    the development  of  "rules" for
communication in the Livenotes medium. It also investigates how groups of both designers and users chose to adapt and
think about,  dialogue-supporting   technology   in distributed   ways.   As such,  we  define   distributed dialogue as a   non-
localized, yet collaborative  activity. Such   distributed  dialogue   may   reveal  unexpected,  non-text-based  patterns (e.g.,
highlighting points or deciding where to put input on a screen) in communication between people that verbal dialogue in
the context of a classroom situation may obscure. Enabling these patterns to emerge in a classroom context can ease
constructive dialogue in which students can engage in different threads of conversation and help teach each other through
clarifying or adding to the teacher-led discussion. In this paper we reinforce the argument that: "Learning occurs as the co-
construction (or reconstruction) of  social    meanings from   within   the  parameters of emergent,    socially negotiated,  and
discursive activity" (Hicks 1996, p. 136).
Our approach of writing on multiple graphic screens linked by wireless technology is similar to other approaches looking at
distributed learning environments such as chat rooms or bulletin boards since it allows for free-from discussion. It extends
longstanding educational arguments that students learn best by actively engaging each other in conversation, and recognizes

* Alastair Iles is a deaf postdoctoral fellow at the Energy and Resources Group. Daniel Glaser is an doctoral candidate in Information
 Design. Matthew Kam obtained his B.S and B.A. degrees from Berkeley in Spring 2001 and has enrolled in Berkeley's M.S. in
 Computer Science this Fall 2001. John Canny is Professor in the Department of Computer Science.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 409

that each student has his or her own resources to contribute but may not have the opportunity to do so (e.g. as argued
through Scardamaliea and Bereiter 1991). Wireless supported dialogue differs greatly from existing approaches because it
not only involves people speaking by handwriting with each other in real time within a physical group situation, but also
can support uncontrolled small group conversation in parallel with a broader level of controlled discussion (such as a
lecture). Moreover, the wireless technology does not fully define what may be communicated and how, but allows users to
develop potentially widely diverging styles of communication by themselves. In contrast, chat rooms and other similar
media are heavily based on typed text, and operate via relatively centralized and fixed communication systems.
The initial results of testing Livenotes in the two graduate classes help illuminate some of its possibilities and problems in
supporting distributed dialogue. We conclude that certain simple features are fundamental to creating an infrastructure
where users can develop rules for negotiation and collaboration through free form, relatively unstructured dialogue. These
features, however, are related to each particular context of use and may not be the same across different groups of users.
We also analyze several key "socio-technical" features of the ways in which the technology was introduced and operated,
with a view to assessing its benefits in small group collaboration and improving Livenotes later in 2001.

WHAT IS LIVENOTES?
Livenotes is a research software prototype and practice for collaborative note taking. It is a Java program that runs on Clio
handheld tablets connected over a wireless TCP/IP network. The tablets and software are designed to be unconstraining and
low-profile in their use. They can be used in many classroom settings without the necessity for direct access to computers
(Figure 1a). Students can record handwritten notes on graphic screens that appear in real time on the Clios of their group
members who are also running the software. Students, then, can exchange annotations and comments in the midst of the
presentation. We chose Clio tablets because they were inexpensive, sufficiently small, light and portable to be used in a
classroom setting, and their Windows CE 2.11 operating system could support a Java Virtual Machine. Livenotes was
implemented in Java since it supported many Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) essential to the needs of this
software such as multithreading, networking, and the Abstract Windowing Toolkit. In addition, Java programs, unlike their
native code counterparts, are sufficiently hardware independent to run on most platforms. This is important for future
flexibility in choice of hardware. Finally, the tablets that we currently chose can run on battery power for up to eight hours,
thus facilitating prolonged note-taking.
Several important design choices were made to guide the anticipated collaborative learning. The program consists of a large
shared whiteboard canvas, navigation bar, and a menu with a variety of options (Figure 1b). The canvas permits users to
draw directly onto the canvas, using the stylus, with differently colored inkstrokes to identify each user. The inkstrokes are
updated across all Clios belonging to the session via the wireless network connections. The navigation bar uses a "page"
metaphor to signify that   the main drawing   area   is only one of many numbered, sequential canvases.     This navigation
structure was chosen since we felt that users may get lost with a single scrollable page and it is a common strategy for
electronic whiteboards. The menu bar is used to connect machines, save and load sessions, choose colors, and also to bring
up a "presence indicator" window. This window helps users identify who else is online and what page they are currently
looking at. A transcript of the note-taking can be saved for future reference, and can be exported to HTML. If desired, the
transcript can be "played back" by being loaded onto the handhelds, though this is currently time consuming for client
tablets due to network and hardware limitations of the Clio tablets. Various design options can be added to Livenotes as
users desire: connection to a TV screen for broadcast to a room, private screens for separate conversation threads, and
HTML export to websites or email for use by participants as notes. Further features may be added from time to time in
response to user feedback.
A collaborative session is started by delegating a server role to a particular Clio or lap-top and connecting (multiple) clients
to it, thus forming a star topological network. A computer can act both as a client and a server. Data compression has been
an active area of research for allowing for responsive updating among the Clios on the wireless network. Tradeoffs between
a highly reduced data format, low-cost compression schemes for the microprocessor, and data integrity of the inkstrokes has
led us to a 50% savings in data format. In addition, thread timing and coordination is also being explored to find a more
balanced updating scheme that will not overload individual machines and the network. For one user study, the wireless
bridge between the Clio handhelds was already part of the computer science building while for another we brought in a
small bridge for each session.

One precedent of a collaborative system using a shared graphical space is Belvedere (Suthers et. al 1997). Like Livenotes it
allows for simultaneous access to a graphical space where users are able to create arguments. It differs from Livenotes
though, since participants use a toolbar to create data, hypotheses, or unspecified textual input, which can be placed at a
location on the whiteboard that they determine. Aside from keyboarding text, users can also create arrows between text
boxes to agree, disagree, or join statements. There also is a window for bringing up hints--either through direct interaction
with the instructor, or with an intelligent system.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   410

Other precedents include the Distributed TVI (DTVI) experiments at Stanford University. These included probably the
most comprehensive evaluations of a learning technology to date, but this is under the framework of students learning and
being evaluated in a traditional lecture mode. DTVI allows small groups of students and a tutor to remotely collaborate
through multiple video and audio channels to learn from a videotaped lecture (Dutra et. al. 1999). Although users are free to
interact through audio and voice channels, there is no notion of collaborative drawing since the viewports are separated
from each other. In DTVI, students regularly discuss the material, and half the students participate in roughly half of the
discussions, so there is a high degree of participation. Outcomes correlate with the amount of interaction in the group. But
surprisingly, there is no significant correlation with the relevance of the dialogue to the course material. Even apparently
non-sequitur conversations   among    students enhance  their  learning.  A second powerful   peer  learning technique  is  peer
instruction (Mazur 1995). Peer instruction employs short episodes of dialogue in groups of students in a normal lecture
classroom in response to questions from the instructor. Like DTVI, peer instruction has shown improvements in outcomes
across many course topics.
DTVI and peer instruction have one feature in common: regular dialogue between a small group of students (less than
seven) while the students are first encountering new material. In both cases, there is a practice to "steer" the dialogue
toward the course material. In DTVI, a teaching assistant prompts students about the material, answers, and questions. In

       Figure 1. a) (left) A Livenotes session--three users communicating as a small group. b)
       (right) What a screen capture of Livenotes looks like.

peer instruction, the  instructor poses specific   questions  that the students  must  address   during pauses  in  the lecture.
Livenotes differs from these precedents because it is designed to run concurrently with a larger classroom conversation and
tries to move the distributed dialogue to a number of tablets simultaneously without any central screen or authority (except
a server to  support  the interplay). Consequently,    differences  in user  personality and  user  familiarity with  `rules' of
communication may affect how Livenotes is used in practice. Livenotes does not provide prefixed rules of communication
so users are likely to make up these rules in the course of learning to use the technology.

USER ANALYSIS

BACKGROUND
Livenotes   was first deployed in  a  graduate  seminar  in  Human   Centered   Computing    (HCC)   in Berkeley's   College  of
Engineering and then in an advanced seminar in Science and Technology Studies (STS) through the Energy and Resources
Group. In both cases the technology was brought in after classes began (12th week in the HCC course, 5th week in the STS
seminar) and hence played a supplementary role in structuring classroom activity. The analysis for the HCC course is based
upon in-classroom observations of participant interactions by three of the paper's authors* and transcript analysis. The STS
course analysis   was  also through   observations  of two  of the  paper's  authors, in   class discussion of  the technology,
unsolicited e-mail dialogue with classmates, transcript analyses, and questionnaires.
Starting in September   2000,  the focus   of  the HCC  course  was    to expand the  theoretical  foundations  for research  on
computers and people through social systems that are broader than what is typically offered by a graduate computer science
course on   human-computer    interaction. The     HCC  class  was  organized  such   that a student  would  first  present  and
summarize the reading for that session, before the instructor further developed the topic and posed questions. Then small
groups of about 4 students each would be formed to work out their responses and share them with the rest of the class.
There were approximately 12 students in the class and most were affiliated with the College of Engineering.

* This is an acceptable data collection for educational researchers (e.g. Ball 1993)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page    411

During   the   12th week   of class,  Livenotes    was  introduced into   the  class. The  intention was    to   provide  a  parallel
communication channel for students to concurrently discuss and clarify points during the student presentation and instructor
lecture while it was happening. For that session 10 students were present and each of them was provided with a Clio tablet
with the Livenotes software installed. The class separated into two user groups (and client-server networks), and used the
Clio   tablets extensively   during both  the student   and professor's   presentations. This was    not surprising   since  all the
participants were highly familiar with computer technology and there was an expectation that Livenotes would be used at
some   point.  As   the next  section illustrates, even though   the lecture   was instructor-led, the students   used   the tablets
selectively to discuss the material in a distributed fashion. During face-to-face group discussion, the Livenotes software lost
the attention   of  students since  they could not   keep up  with   this fast paced  environment.   Livenotes   lost the students'
attention because they preferred to communicate verbally, and could not easily focus on the parallel distributed dialogue.
During group summaries, one team leader used the tablet to read off his ideas to the instructor. The tablets were only used
for one class, and a total of 13 pages were recorded for our analysis.
The STS seminar in Spring 2001 brought participants from a diverse set of disciplines together to discuss science as social
and cultural practices. This was a high-level research seminar of 10-12 participants who engaged in extensive face-to-face
interaction throughout. Participants came from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds (energy and environmental policy,
medical sociology, political science, and education) and had different levels of familiarity with the subjects discussed. In
each seminar session, participants took turns to present 3-4 readings each week, with another class member providing
commentary, before opening the meeting up to discussion of several research questions posed by the leader. The aim was to
generate input into each participant's dissertation or research project. One aspect of the seminar was taking notes for a deaf
post-doctoral fellow who relied on peer note-taking to follow class discussion. Prior to the introduction of Livenotes, this
note-taking took the form of recording by pen and paper, with the responsibility of being the scribe rotating between
individual participants each week.
In the 5th week, Livenotes was introduced. The tablets were used for three classes, which generated 26, 34, and 28 pages of
transcripts  respectively  that we  could  analyze.  In contrast to  the  HCC    class, many  participants  were  unfamiliar   with
wireless computer technology. Additionally, not every seminar participant used Livenotes; some participants observed how
their peers were using Livenotes but did not attempt to use Livenotes themselves. In the first class, three Clios were used,
with two people taking notes for the deaf participant. In the second class, different people performed this note-taking role,
but also engaged in distributed discussion. In the third class, the deaf participant was the session presenter and sought to
make Livenotes a central part of the discussion. Five people participated actively, with four others observing passively for
most of the time. We noticed that some people also joined the network by looking over a user's shoulder.

THE PROCESS OF INTRODUCING LIVENOTES
In both cases, the decision to introduce Livenotes into the class was top-down, made by the professor in cooperation with
one or two students interested in the technology. There was little discussion of whether participants wished to try Livenotes
out, or of what Livenotes might contribute to their classroom experiences. This may have affected the responses of the
participants,  in  that some  people--particularly   in the  STS   seminar--expressed     concern  about  the  lack   of discussion
regarding   the  deployment   of   Livenotes. For   them, the tablets  simply    appeared  mysteriously   in   a meeting,    without
explanation as to why they were being used. In fact, one of the professors was worried that the way in which Livenotes was
introduced may have influenced the seminar's social dynamics adversely.

KEY USAGE ISSUES
We observed many interesting phenomena during the trials, but choose to discuss three examples that bear particularly on
future design considerations of Livenotes that may better support collaborative learning. We will refer to both trials because
similar issues were raised by both seminar and lecture formats, and as such, may be relevant to any usage of Livenotes in
general.

CONNECTING UP AND GETTING ON THE SAME PAGE
When starting Livenotes for the first time in a session, participants did not know whether Livenotes was operational. They
did not know who were participating. The whiteboard canvas by itself could not indicate whether the network was working
or  if everyone   was   receiving and sending  any   handwritten   messages.   Additionally, throughout   a session,  people  were
repeatedly uncertain, on moving to a new page, whether others had also advanced to the page, or were still looking at
earlier pages. It was possible for participants to open the "presence indicator" window to check if the individual Clio was
connected to the server, who else were on-line, as well as the pages that these individuals were currently looking at.
However, it was difficult for participants not already aware of this option to make use of this window.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page   412

                                                                                               In   both the     lecture and
                                                                                               seminar   meetings,   it  was
                                                                                               observed       that     many
                                                                                               participants    wrote     brief
                                                                                               messages       to  determine
                                                                                               whether     or      not    the
                                                                                               wireless  connection      was
                                                                                               transmitting              these
                                                                                               messages to the rest of the
                                                                                               user group. Such opening
                                                                                               messages   included:      "Can
                                                                                               you  receive?",    "Hi",   "Is
                                                                                               this      working?",        or
                                                                                               "Namaste".        Sometimes,
                                                                                               especially in the seminar,
                                                                                               certain individuals     would
                                                                                               make    little drawings     to
                                                                                               see  if   others   could,   or
                                                                                               would,     declare        their
                                                                                               presence by adding to the
                                                                                               images.    When      moving
                   Figure 2. Greetings dominated the first page of each session.               between pages, individual
                                                                                               users might write: "Is this
page current?" or "Can anyone read this!?" The important observation is that users were able to create rules to decide
whether or not the network was operational, based on their communication, rather than on the technology per se. Figure 2
illustrates the first page of one such session.

NAVIGATION AND SPACE MANAGEMENT
Two of the most pressing communication challenges that Livenotes poses are the distributed decision-making involved in
navigating between and within pages, as well as in dividing up a page so that more than one user can participate. We found
that although many different conversations and topics were jumbled together on the one page, users were nonetheless
mostly able to coordinate how they would share their space and to work out ways to distinguish between the various
conversation threads to a reasonable extent. Two observations were especially important.
First, people sitting far apart in the classroom often did not know whether or when they should move to a new page.
However, they tested various symbols to either signal the need to change pages, or to ask if other people had changed
pages. For example, in the 2nd seminar session, people used "Now we go to a new page", "page 4    ", "p5?", "    ", or "I got
it!" in one corner of the page to communicate in this way. One user drew little arrows at the base of the page as if it was a
continuous scrolling page.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 413

Second, people did not always know whether or not others were paying attention to their input, or whether what they wrote
was visible in the jumble of writing to the others. They could not rely on the kinds of cues that verbal, face-to-face
communication can often provide. The conversation threads might not be easy to connect together. This differs from trying
to find out if participants are all "on the same page", in that specific people may be concerned that their contribution is not
being read or evaluated by the group. The social context matters greatly for how users resolve this issue.
We observed that a seminar session that was primarily note-taking by one or two people was fairly simple: the users would

                                               a             b

            c

         d

       Figure 3. A screen capture showing a variety of elements including (a) linking together disjoint
       spaces of conversation (b) marking territory (c) highlighting someone else's points (d) highlighting
       one's own points for attention.

write in temporal sequence down the page in "sentences", with the inkstroke colors distinguishing between scribes. It was
easy to follow the conversation thread, because there was just one, sometimes with little annotations by the deaf participant
at the side. But when the sessions turned into a distributed discussion involving up to five people, space management
changed markedly and new rules began to emerge. People would write phrases all over the page. They often highlighted
specific parts of the page by drawing boxes or circles around their input (Figure 3a). In doing so, they tried to mark off
territory for their input (Figure 3b). Quite commonly, participants underlined phrases to emphasize points (Figure 3c).
Occasionally, a user would simply draw lines under two different contributions. Moreover, people often drew arrows or
lines across the page to connect up widely scattered phrases to continue the thread and to pick up what they were saying
because someone else was writing in the space (Figure 3d). Or they might put in a series of numbers next to phrases. These
non-textual inputs help make Livenotes quite different from most other technologies for collaborative learning.

DISCUSSION, PLAY AND DRAWING
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 414

The kinds of communication that Livenotes enables can be multi-layered and reflect mutual teaching and clarification of
points. We observed that users in the seminar would sometimes engage in overlapping dialogue: taking summary notes of
the presentation (Figure 4a), commenting on issues raised by the presentation and perhaps "training" people less familiar
with the topic (Figure 4b), engaging in "side" conversation    unrelated to the topic (Figure  4c), or making  humorous
contributions (Figure 4d). However, it could be difficult for participants to determine whether or not a given input was
related to the topic. Sometimes, users would identify a speaker by name to suggest that the reference was part of the group
discussion. Nevertheless, even when a point followed the larger class discussion, there was a risk that it would not be
resolved within the same time period and depth as the larger discussion. For example a user asked to clarify a small lecture
point "can somebody give me an example of some `organizational knowledge' that differs from individual knowledge?",
while no less than seven responses over three full pages were provided. At the end of this heated exchange while turning
back to the relatively laconic lecture a user unsurprisingly asked "so is anyone else having trouble listening & writing?".
Simultaneously, Livenotes can also provide a space for drawings and playfulness that do not necessarily follow the lecture
or presentation, but that allow users to add a social dimension to their writing. People sometimes drew images on the page

                                        d

          c                                                                                    a

          b

  Figure 4. Transcript showing (a) summing up the lecture, (b) expanding on or developing lecture themes   (c)
  an unrelated topic and (d) humorous interludes and drawings

alongside the textual discussion. These images could be humorous interludes or surprisingly novel attempts at clarification
of discussion points. For example, an instructor in the STS seminar drew an egg representing a technical norm, while
another less familiar with the literature in contempt of the idea drew Sigourney Weaver attacking the egg (as an alien), and
the first participant responded, "the larva is in you" referring back to the topic of embodied knowledge. Similarly, Figure 4
shows drawings associated with Pooh the Bear (Figure 4d) while Figure 2 shows how participants in the HCC class drew
ants creeping across the page and being devoured by a monster.
Strikingly, these drawings did not appear in the session where only one or two members were taking notes for the deaf
participant. Usually, the humorous episodes were at the start or end of a session, so people may have been implicitly using
these drawings as a means of getting accustomed to the wireless technology and to creating a rapport without necessarily
talking verbally to each other. This illustrates how some participants may use drawings or play as a way to facilitate social
interaction and to attract the attention of each other. Livenotes has the capacity to support this kind of activity because of its
graphics-based interface, which permits free-form and informal expressions, whereas text-based interfaces are unlikely to
permit it. However, we observed that some participants seemed to see such drawing and playfulness as detracting from the
session's verbal dialogue, without considering how jokes may form part of this conversation.
In all these cases, participants actively created (or negotiated) solutions in the form of "rules", symbols, and governance of
exchanges to be distributed across the participants. These solutions were based on communication and social norm-making
that substituted for technical features not already built into Livenotes or the Clios. Interestingly, the behavior observed was
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page   415

often similar to the conventions generated by the deaf participant in his written conversations, in that he used arrows,
underlining, circling, and other space management features.

QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
We performed an initial quantitative analysis of the third STS session transcript to start developing indicators of learning
and user activity for our future research. First, we developed units of analysis based on our observations of user behavior,
as described above. We counted the number of stylus marks that each user made on each canvas page, relying on pen
colors. Next, we distributed these marks into two categories: management (how users control dialogue on the canvas) and
content (what users say  in  relation to  the classroom presentation).   We then allocated the  marks    to the specific sub-
categories that we created in analyzing the examples above, distinguishing between marks according to our judgment of
how they fit into the overall dialogue. Our major conclusions were that:
    ·    Management marks were almost as many as content marks (46.82% compared to 53.18%), suggesting that users
         not only discussed the lecture but also worked to manage their dialogue;
    ·    The vast majority of content marks (83%) related directly to the lecture in some way, with only 12% of marks
         being on unrelated topics and humorous interludes, implying that Livenotes did facilitate in-group discussion, and
         that perceptions of Livenotes as dominated by play were ungrounded;
    ·    One person (the presenter of the session: 45%) was expertly managing the dialogue ­ through linking points and
         marking territory ­ with the assistance of two other persons (who acted as notetakers for the presenters: 20% and
         12%  respectively), suggesting   that  Livenotes dialogue  can  be structured, and also   that  some   users  control
         whiteboard space more than others;
    ·    In contrast, the same three users were more even in the number of their highlighting marks (31%, 28% and 28%
         respectively), yet produced far more such marks than other users, suggesting that highlighting is not only used
         more by some users but also differs from marking territory as a way to make dialogue clearer to other users;
    ·    Two people out of six users produced almost all the drawing errors (74%), implying that they differed markedly
         in their ease with the technology from the others; and
    ·    The vast majority of humorous interludes and drawings came in the first four pages of the transcript and one
         person accounted for 41%, suggesting that these not only are dependent on personality factors but also on the
         context (whether dialogue is starting, or is underway).
Breakdowns in use
We noticed several types of breakdowns in the usage of Livenotes -- from the most basic technical failure of hardwire and
wireless signals, to more socially contingent examples like users disengaging from the technology when they become
overwhelmed   in keeping up   with    the verbal and  distributed  whiteboard  forms of  discourse  during    classes. These
breakdowns and, in some cases, recovery methods include:
   ·    Temporary   technical disruptions:    Users experienced   a number   of  interruptions including    slow  whiteboard
        responses to stylus inputs and server lag. Although it is often slower to write on the wireless tablets than with
        paper and pencil, some users took advantage of parallel note-taking--namely two or more people could write at
        once to track fast moving conversation. They could fill in information gaps side by side.
   ·    Multiple tasks and finite concentration: People had various degrees of trouble following the discussion in the
        Livenotes user group Livenotes and the instructor-led discussion in the classroom. For some people, one means of
        coping with this was to abandon Livenotes altogether. Other users, however, appeared to be comfortable with
        switching between Livenotes and verbal conversations.
   ·    Frustration at the play witnessed: Non-participants sometimes complained that the occasional smiles or laughter
        by the Livenotes users were at their expense. The sense of parallel conversations, which were often perceived as
        being unrelated to the session's topic, contributed to the tension between users and non-users of Livenotes. Non-
        users who had many users in their field of view but could not see the contents of the tablets were more critical than
        non-users who could share or look over a shoulder of a user to see the proceedings of the conversation within a
        Livenotes group.
These breakdowns further imply that the ability of the participants to engage in negotiations of the rules and symbols to
facilitate the use of Livenotes is crucial in helping make the technology workable. This ability is affected by several
variables that we plan to investigate in future trials and which we were not able to resolve through the few, yet varied, STS
survey respondents. For example, one person described the stylus as being "completely too slow... uncomfortable" while
another "liked it". A respondent wrote: "It was too hard to try to write coherently ... I was always mentally very behind the
discussion" while another "didn't think it was a problem [coordinating both conversations]". Nevertheless, there was some
agreement where they did not like the idea of private notes since it would splinter the group even more.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 416

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
We conclude that, through Livenotes and handheld wireless screens, students can learn from each other during the course of
a lecture or seminar in distributed and "horizontal" ways otherwise not possible. They can actively engage in discussion and
commentary on lectures or presentations as these occur, thus enhancing their comprehension and ability to participate.
Livenotes differs markedly from existing approaches to distributed learning that rely on typed text and relatively fixed
technical and communication modalities. It is interactive dialogue that is distributed across a number of people, can take
place in real time, can have many threads that can appear or vanish within a session, and can readily change in response to
user participation. Wireless-supported dialogue allows much greater control over content and communication features to be
given to users, instead of being imposed and moderated from the top-down.
This dialogue ­ as seen in Figure 4 for example ­ is often multi-layered, with people taking notes of the session, more
experienced members explaining ideas to other, less knowledgeable people, and members engaging in what may seem to be
peripheral conversation that nevertheless helps illuminate session topics. Even if students make erroneous statements of
knowledge, they can be immediately corrected by other users or by teachers who may be involved, and their dialogue can
be posted in various forms (email, web, or print) for further distributed comment and scrutiny. The inherent flexibility and
whiteboard nature of Livenotes enables such free form, mutually correcting dialogue. In contrast, the enhanced, but text-
based, DVTI system appears to be primarily based on lecture summaries instead of interactive dialogue (according to
published transcripts available from www.sun.com/research.ics.notes.html). It is easier to maintain control over content
through centralized and text-based systems, but this may inhibit the emergence of dialogue in small groups such as those
that we observed.
In turn, we conclude that users can generate significant non-technical modifications to systems through engaging in the
communication and social interaction enabled by Livenotes. We have found the effectiveness of the technology is highly
contingent on the social context that it is being used in. In particular, users appear to generate social "rules", symbols, and
conventions (often expressed in graphical or text-graphical forms) that fill in for missing or inaccessible technical features,
and that enable communication to take place effectively. Livenotes allows this process of generation to occur because it is
not "finished", depends on free form whiteboards, and has great flexibility built in. We have also realized that the ways in
which deaf people engage in written conversations can provide valuable insight into how Livenotes might work in settings
where hearing users write on handheld whiteboards and as a media for comparative purposes with the current development
of Livenotes.
Designers of learning support systems, then, can gain much fruitful insight from studying how users work with technology.
Drawing on the insights of the two trials to date, we recommend that, to make further advances in developing collaborative
learning systems, designers consider the following:
·   Systems need to be designed with flexibility and "unfinished" (comparatively unspecified) features to allow users to
    develop   modifications through    their communication  activities. This facilitates negotiations between   users in each
    particular context or use setting.
·   Because some users became frustrated with the tablets since they demanded too much attention, different features
    should be added so that the user can participate at different levels of engagement. For example, their collaborative
    whiteboard could simply be tied to a group leader so that they do not need to worry about keeping up with navigation.
·   Systems need to be designed to take account of how users may rely on communication and negotiation to deal with
    issues such as navigation between pages, space management on pages with multiple conversation threads and jumbled
    writing, and working out if users are "on the same page".
Finally, we are developing evaluation metrics for both adaptation and learning benefits of using Livenotes. This will
include a typology of users, development of a protocol analysis to capture the multi-modal interactions with this media, and
assessments on the utility of Livenotes in learning. Some of these indicators can be seen in our initial quantitative analysis.
From our first trials, we identified familiarity with computer technology, preferences for typing versus handwriting, and the
personality and multi-task capabilities as relevant user dimensions. Although we were able to make comparisons between
the verbal and Livenotes conversations in section 3 of this paper, we are planning to set up video cameras to record
classroom dialogue (with and without the use of Livenotes), to augment the data logs captured by Livenotes (e.g., to
provide time logs of when users write on the canvas) with contextual information, and to interview participants before and
after the introduction of Livenotes. We plan to cross-check these data sources against each other according to the timeline
of the transcripts. We  will  also develop     software tools to automate    this analysis to some    extent. These technical
developments will play an important role in developing evaluation metrics with teachers on the effectiveness of Livenotes
in the classroom.
REFERENCES:
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page  417

Ball D. (1993) Halves, pieces, and twoths: Constructing and using representational contexts in teaching fractions. In T.P.
         Carpenter, E.  Fennema and T. A.   Romberg (Eds.), Rational numbers: An integration     of research. Studies in
         mathematical thinking and learning (pp 157-195). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, Hillsdale, NJ.
Dutra, J. Gibbons, J., Pannoni, R., Sipusic, M., Smith, R., Sutherland, W. (1999), "Virtual Collaborative Learning: A
         Comparison between Face-to-Face Tutored Video Instruction (TVI) and Distributed Tutored Video Instruction
         (DTVI)" Sun Microsystems Research Technical Report TR-99-72.
Hicks, D. (1996) Contextual inquiries: A discourse-oriented study of classroom learning. In D. Hicks (Ed.), Discourse,
         Learning, and Schooling (pp. 104-141). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mazur, E., (1997) "Peer Instruction: A User's Manual", Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., Teasley, S. D. (Eds.) (1991), Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington, DC:
         American Psychological Association.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C. (1991) "Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building. A challenge for the
         design of new knowledge media". The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1:37-68.
Slavin R.(1990) "Cooperative Learning: Theory, Research, and Practice", Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Suthers, D., Toth,  E., Weiner, A.  (1997),  "An Integrated Approach  to Implementing     Collaborative Inquiry  in   the
         Classroom", CSCL '97 Proceedings.
