Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  435

         Collaborative Learning at Low Cost: CoWeb Use in
                                      English Composition
    Jochen Rick, Mark Guzdial, Karen Carroll Lissa Holloway-Attaway, Brandy Walker
         College of Computing / GVU Center                       School of Literature, Communication, and
               CultureGeorgia Institute of Technology                Georgia Institute of Technology
                  {jochen.rick, guzdial, kcarroll}@cc.gatech.edu{lissa.holloway-attaway,
                                            brandy.walker}@lcc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
CoWeb is a collaborative learning environment used in many classes at Georgia Institute of Technology; it is an extremely
simple domain-independent collaboration tool. Our aim is to show that such a simple system can sustain useful peer-to-peer
and instructor-to-student interaction that fosters better performance and learning, without incurring a high cost. In this
paper, we present evidence of the success of this tool in supporting learning at low cost in one environment--freshman-
level English classes.

Keywords
CoWeb, low cost, close reading, English composition, collaborative learning

INTRODUCTION
In 1998, we introduced CoWeb (short for Collaborative Web-site) to Georgia Institute of Technology. Since then, we have
been applying this simple collaboration technology to class contexts in different domains: architecture, computer science,
mathematics, engineering, and English. Though we have developed a few specialized features, such as an equation editor to
simplify sharing of mathematical equations, the CoWeb interface remains largely the same across these different domains.
This study examines the use of CoWeb in freshman-level English classes. In particular, we show both learning and cost
effectiveness. By engaging   students in collaboration, we can    leverage the     large numbers  in classes to  create greater
opportunities for discussion, reflection, and (consequently) learning. Because the increased opportunity for learning is
coming from the students themselves, the cost for the institution does not need to rise any further than simply providing
oversight of the process. Thus, for relatively low costs (cost effectiveness), significant improvement can be made in class
performance (learning effectiveness).
So, our use of CoWeb in English composition demonstrates that a simple and flexible collaboration tool can be effective for
providing the benefit of collaborative learning while still being cost effective.

COWEB
CoWeb is conceptually based on the WikiWikiWeb* (or Wiki) by Ward Cunningham (Leuf & Cunningham, 2001). The
Wiki is a web-site that invites all users to edit any page within the site and add new pages using only a common web
browser; the text is edited in an HTML text area without special applets or plug-ins. The Wiki is an unusual collaboration
space in its total freedom, ease of access and use, and lack of structure. The Wiki is inherently democratic--every user has
exactly the same capabilities as any other user.
Like the Wiki, CoWeb looks like a fairly traditional web-site, except that every page has a set of buttons at the top that
allow the user to do various things such as edit the page, (un)lock the page, or view the history of the page over time. Links
between pages are easily created by referencing pages within the same site by name (e.g., *Page Name*). If a page with the
given name doesn't already exist, a create link shows up next to the name upon save; clicking on this creates the new page
(see Figure 1). CoWeb shares Wiki's democratic philosophy of equal power to all users. Though our usage is mostly set in
classes, where  there  is someone in  charge  (the instructor), we find little    reason to give more  interface power   to the
instructor than to the students. The instructor naturally has social power that does not need to be reinforced by the interface.
As one professor commented: "I just like the interaction that it enables. It's basically a whiteboard that everyone can write
on. Protections are always kind of a pain."

* http://c2.com/cgi-bin/wiki
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                  page        436

Figure 1: Viewing / Editing a CoWeb Page in a Web Browser
Through over a dozen iterations in the last three years, CoWeb has had features added and the interface streamlined to fit
well into classroom use (Guzdial, Rick, & Kerimbaev, 2000). Over 100 class CoWebs are now in use at Georgia Tech. A
wide variety of educational activities have been invented by instructors for their classes (Guzdial, Rick, & Kehoe, 2001),
and we have catalogued some    25 common  activities that we see tailored to meet specific class needs (Collaborative
Software Laboratory, 2000).

COWEB USE IN ENGLISH COMPOSITION
In English composition, CoWeb is used for an activity called close reading, where prose or a poem for discussion is posted,
and students comment upon it by inserting links directly into the prose or poem. Students then comment upon each other's
comments and even use the same technique to comment upon each other's essays. Figure 2 illustrates two kinds of close
reading activities. The left picture shows part of a CoWeb close reading assignment based on a chat session. Students
completed a computer-based chat session based on classroom topics and assigned reading. The instructor then posted the
contents of that chat session into the CoWeb. From there, students were instructed to find interesting parts of the discussion
and create pages associated with the section. Basically, the students would find an interesting fragment and surround it with
*s. When saving the page, they could create a new CoWeb page with that fragment as the title. So, the original chat session
was preserved, but comments could be made on the most important sections of the chat session. The right picture of Figure
2 shows the same activity, except that the text to be annotated is a classroom reading, in this case from Karl Marx's "The
German Ideology."

Figure 2: Close Reading Exercises on CoWeb (left picture based on a chat session, right picture base on literature).
       Names have been disguised from the original.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   437

LEARNING EFFECTIVENESS
Learning effectiveness is the amount learned in relation to the cost for achieving that learning (i.e. time on task). In this
section, we show our evidence for learning through use of CoWeb. Then, in the next section, we show that this learning
benefit is achievable at a low cost.
We  studied two   sections of   an English 101(1)   class, taught by  the same  instructor. The first section (24 students) used
CoWeb to complete various assignments(2). The comparison section (25 students) did the same activities, but the students
worked in a threaded-discussion on-line environment(3) on the close reading activities and individually on the essays. As
each section did the same activities, student cost (effort) should be identical. To confirm this, we paid several students in
both sections to track their time spent on the class; no notable differences between the groups were observed.
Through surveys, we find that the CoWeb section had significantly better attitudes toward collaboration than did students in
the comparison section (Table 1). In addition, the CoWeb section received higher grades (grade breakdown: 7 A's, 10 B's, 3
C's, others F or W) than the comparison section (grade breakdown: 19 B's, 3 D's, others F or W), which indicates better
performance and suggests better learning. In particular, the instructor noted that the CoWeb section showed more variance,
thereby allowing A's to be assigned.
Statement                                                                 CoWeb Section           Comparison Section
I would   rather work  independently    on  assignments     than  in            3.83                     2.81
groups or teams.
I feel working with others on assignments is more helpful than                  2.00                     2.75
working alone.
When working on team projects, I feel motivated by my sense                     1.78                     2.69
of responsibility to the group.
I like doing teamwork.                                                          1.89                     2.75
I found it useful to relate my work to that of others.                          1.56                     2.50
Table 1: Attitudes toward Collaboration, where 1 is strongly agree and 5 is strongly disagree. p < 0.05 on a two-
        tailed t-test for all of these statements
We recognize that grades are not a precise measure of performance, and they are too large-grained to inform us about where
any learning benefit may have come from. As such, twelve students were selected randomly from each section and their
work rated by various criteria (Table 2). Five assignments were rated: two close reading assignments based on student-
generated  chat  sessions  (rated  for the first  6 criteria, which   we  refer to as chat  close readings),  two close  reading
assignments based on literature (rated for the first 10 criteria, referred to as literature close readings), and one formal essay
(rated for all 15 criteria). To keep individual bias to a minimum, two raters (one the course instructor, the other a colleague
in the same department) rated each assignment on a scale of one to four (four being highest performance). No statistically
significant differences were found in their ratings, and all criteria had better than 70% of the ratings identical. In each rating
category, the CoWeb section outperformed the comparison section (in most, by a large statistically significant amount):
Category                                                   CoWeb Section           Comparison Section         Difference
Engagement with Class Material                                   2.52                       1.88                0.64
Foundation for Research                                          2.49                       1.68                0.82
Reflective  /    Recursive    Writing    Practices:              2.30                       1.58                0.73
Authorial voice
Reflective  /    Recursive    Writing    Practices:              2.24                       1.49                0.75
Reflection and Exploration
Critical Vocabulary: Understanding                               2.30                       1.54                0.76
Critical Vocabulary: Application                                 2.28                       1.33                0.95

(1) English 101 is a fictional course number, but the course is the Georgia Tech equivalent of English 101
(2) The CoWeb section was chosen at random and students did not know a priori which section would use CoWeb, so
  selection bias was minimized.
(3) The comparison class's on-line environment was similar to a Usenet newsgroup. The close reading text was the original
  posting and students replied to it with their annotations.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                 page  438

Formation of Critical Questions:                                      2.39                            1.94                         0.44
Engagement with Topic
Formation of Critical Questions:                                      2.24                            2.21                         0.03*
Quality of Questions / Arguments
Critical / Close Reading Skills:                                      2.29                            1.97                         0.32*
Analysis
Critical / Close Reading Skills:                                      2.36                            2.06                         0.31*
Identification of Issues
Research Skills: Locating Information                                 3.04                            2.54                         0.50
Research Skills: Using Information                                    2.75                            2.00                         0.75
Identification of Critical Sources                                    2.75                            2.08                         0.67
Engagement     and     Integration      of   Research                 2.71                            1.75                         0.96
Sources
Effective   Use     of   Formal       Essay   Writing                 2.79                            2.21                         0.58
Conventions for Argumentation
Table 2: Writing Performance. p < .05 on a two-tailed t-test for all except *
On average, the students in the CoWeb section did significantly better on writing essays than the comparison section,
particularly on issues of vocabulary and essay organization. Several categories show near 1.00 differences in performance;
on a scale of one to four, one point of difference indicates a large difference in performance. For instance, on critical
vocabulary application, the CoWeb section average is between 2 (chosen when "the student deploys these terms where
appropriate in his/her writing, but most are misused") and 3 ("the student deploys most of these terms where appropriate in
his/her writing, but occasionally misuses them"), while the comparison section average is between 1 ("the student never
successfully deploys these terms where appropriate in his/her writing") and 2.
Clearly, CoWeb seems to engender better performance on these activities; however, we also wanted to get an idea as to
whether there was a cumulative effect of CoWeb use over the term. As such, we looked at performance over the term on
similar assignments. If CoWeb has a cumulative effect, the difference in ratings (i.e. performance-gap) should increase over
time. Figure 3 shows that for each of the two assignment types noted earlier, the performance-gap increased over the term,
though not by a large margin (.29 and .07 respectively).

                   Literature Close Readings                                                 Chat Close Readings

     2.5                                                                     2.5
     2.0                                                                     2.0
                                                 CoWeb Section                                                             CoWeb
     1.5                                                                     1.5                                           Section
     1.0                                         Comparison                  1.0                                           Comparison
                                                 Section                                                                   Section
     0.5                                                                     0.5
     0.0                                                                     0.0
                 1                2                                                       1                2

Figure 3: Graphs demonstrating that the performance-gap between CoWeb and comparison section increases over
          time on two different types of assignments
So overall,  we    conclude that     CoWeb   usage       in close reading  activities       was effective    for learning in       this study. The
performance of the students in the CoWeb section was significantly better by many key subject criteria over the comparison
section. At the same time, attitudes towards collaborative learning improved. We speculate that these two factors are not
independent;  instead,  as  the     use of collaborative     learning proves      beneficial,   more learning    will happen,       which  in  turn
improves the attitude towards collaboration. Furthermore, instead of just improving performance on the activity itself,
CoWeb students show a cumulative learning effect.

COST EFFECTIVENESS
Now that we have shown learning effectiveness, it becomes important to look at costs. We aim to show that CoWeb use has
both low infrastructure and human costs.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  439

Infrastructure costs are negligible. Though a server was bought for this study, that server can support at least a dozen
classes over many terms. CoWeb is a cross-platform and lightweight server application that can be run on virtually any
hardware (in some cases, old 486's), so even a $1000 server can easily support many classes. Student access to internet-
enabled computers is essential for CoWeb use; at Georgia Tech, there was no need to provide any infrastructure for this
since it was already present. Nor is use of that infrastructure markedly increased, considering that students would need
similar amounts of time for other applications for the same class (i.e. word processing). At other locations where the
infrastructure is not in place, that cost may be prohibitive; however, this infrastructure is becoming very common. The
CoWeb software is open-source freeware(4); thus, there are no software costs.
Administration costs too are negligible. Besides the tracking software (specifically used for gathering study data) and a
couple of software upgrades (the CoWeb software is still actively being developed), an English professor (not a computer
specialist) was  able  to administer   the server without assistance.   In  total, the  amount  of   administration time   over the
semester was less than an hour.
By far, the dominant cost factor in CoWeb use is instructor time. The instructor for the two sections, using self reporting,
averaged about 2.5 hours per week devoted to CoWeb usage; this is quite reasonable as it is about the same amount of time
as an office hours session. However, this does not give us a clear idea of how she spent that time or how student usage
relates to instructor involvement.
In the term following our learning study, we set up CoWeb to log usage time. We did this for two instructors, teaching the
same class (English 102(5)). The first (instructor 1) was the instructor for the original class, and here taught the follow-up
course (class 1: 24 students, with 1 withdrawing). The second (instructor 2) was the second rater for the performance
assessment. This was the first time this instructor used CoWeb, using one CoWeb for three sections of the same class (class
2: 64 students,   with 5   withdrawing).   As   she was  getting   used  to  CoWeb,     instructor 2 still relied on  another   web
environment for the class; in contrast, all on-line activities for instructor 1 were done with CoWeb(6). The instructors did
different activities with their class and have different styles of using the technology, so this data is a good cross-section of
instructional uses. Table 3 summarizes instructor and student time on CoWeb.
                                                        Class 1                      Class 2
Average Not-Withdrawing Student Time                  17.95 hours                    8.13 hours
Total Student Time                                    412.84 hours                 484.82 hours
Total Instructor Time                                 41.30 hours                   57.35 hours
Total Student Time / Instructor Time                     10.00                          8.45
Table 3: Instructor and Student Time using CoWeb
What is most notable is that in both cases the ratio of total time spent by students to total time spent by the instructor is
similar (10.00 and 8.45). One way to measure the cost effectiveness of an educational activity is to contrast the ratio of
student to instructor time. By this criterion, lecture is cost effective. For each hour of instructor time input, there are n hours
of total student  time (24.00  and  21.33(7) respectively in   our case) spent engaged     in the learning  activity. This number
estimate is a bit high, considering it does not include preparation time for the instructor or absenteeism for the students.
While lecture scores high marks on efficiency, it loses in learning effectiveness, as student involvement tends to be passive
(particularly for large classes where cost efficiency would be high). In contrast, one-on-one tutoring, as may occur during
office hours, can be quite active and engaging. Unfortunately, one-on-one tutoring is not economically feasible, with a ratio
of 1.00   hour of instructor   time to student  time. The CoWeb      ratios (around    9) on  the other hand   seem   a reasonable
compromise of the cost effectiveness of lower instructor time with the learning effectiveness of more active learning (as
students construct artifacts).
Unlike lectures that have a high attendance level, time-spent using an educational technology can be highly varied. One
scenario could have an exponential drop-off, with only a few students using the technology often. While the technology
might have   marked    effects on   these  few students  large enough    to affect  the class average,  it  probably  wouldn't  be
considered a healthy situation in most schools. What we want to see is that the technology is reaching most if not all
students.

(4) It can be downloaded from http://minnow.cc.gatech.edu/swiki
(5) Again, English 102 is a fictional course name.
(6) In the future, instructor 2 plans to only use CoWeb.
(7) 64 students / 3 sections = 21.33 student class hours per instructor hour
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   440

To look at the distribution of usage across students, Figure 4 plots student time on CoWeb from most usage to least usage.
The vertical axis is the number of hours spent in CoWeb, and the horizontal axis represents different students, ordered in
terms of the amount of time they spent in CoWeb.

Figure 4: Distributions of Students' CoWeb Usage (from most use to least use)
What it shows is that while usage varies quite widely, it does so in a near linear way (for both classes). Also, in both cases,
there seems to be a grouping around the class average with only a few doing significantly less or more. This grouping can
be seen in the right graph where there is a dip below the line to the left of the center and a dip above the line to the right of
the center. For an activity, like homework, a roughly linear distribution with a few doing significantly more or less than the
average seems acceptable.
Are some activities more cost effective than others (i.e. requiring less instructor time for equal student effort)? If so,
efficiency  could then  be improved   by focusing  on certain activities and  dropping less efficient activities. To test this
hypothesis, we recorded student and instructor time on CoWeb over the term (Figure 5--horizontal axis represents week
intervals over the course of the term, and vertical axis represents time spent in the CoWeb during that interval). After
looking at the data, interviews with the instructors were conducted to find out what activities occurred and how their time
was spent.

Figure 5: Distribution of Time per Week for Both Classes (Note: Week 9 is Spring Break)
A couple of conclusions can be drawn from this data. First, almost all of the time, the instructor put in some of the effort
before the students; this can be seen particularly well for instructor 2, where instructor time seems almost shifted a week off
the student time. So, a significant proportion of instructor time is spent on setting up the space; this observation was
confirmed by both instructors during the interviews. Second, instructor time is closely linked to student time for each
assignment. The only exception is week 15 for instructor 1, where she spent just over 10 hours on CoWeb; this time was
mainly spent on grading. Instructor 2 did grading throughout the term. As such, there is no assignment for either instructor
that is far more or less efficient. One way to explain this is that the amount of time that instructors and students spend on an
assignment   is closely related to the point value  of the assignment;    so, the original hypothesis  about more    efficient
assignments is flawed.
Instructor 2 mainly used CoWeb for one large assignment worth 35 percent of their grade (weeks 2-12). Students worked in
small groups (2-3 members) to investigate a decade from 1800-1912. Each group posted a timeline with a minimum of 10
significant science or  technological  innovations or  discoveries identified  in that decade; each   member  of   the group
researched one of these events in depth and wrote a five page paper on it. The purpose of this project was to provide a
database of information about science and technology in the 19th century that students could use as background for their
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page 441

final project--to create a web-site to understand a 20th century phenomenon in terms of its origins or background in the 19th
century. As such, CoWeb served as a research space where students could benefit from the work of their classmates.
Although students had to link their final project to the class CoWeb for other students to see, the final projects were
required to be traditional web-sites and could not be built in CoWeb. However, the instructor encouraged students to use
CoWeb as a way to collaborate on their final project. Most of the use in weeks 13 through 16 is attributable to that
voluntary collaboration.
Instructor 1 used CoWeb throughout the term for multiple smaller assignments. Students were required to complete three
chat-based and one literature-based close reading assignments. Also, students posted summaries and discussion about the
class reading.   Instructor  1 also used   the  space  as   a way  to distribute class  readings and   communicate   deadlines   and
activities to the students. The largest chunk of student use came during weeks 15 through 17, when they worked on a final
project. Like class 2, the final project for class 1 was for groups to build a web-site.
Unlike instructor 2, instructor 1 allowed students to do their web project entirely in CoWeb; four out of six groups decided
to complete their projects entirely in CoWeb. So, students found interaction on CoWeb useful enough to use it instead of
traditional web-site tools, such as Microsoft FrontPageTM. As students tend to choose the most effective ways to accomplish
their goals, this   is further evidence    of CoWeb's     cost effectiveness (this  time  for students). Furthermore,   Instructor 1
commented that the quality of the final projects was higher than previous classes as CoWeb-using students concentrated
more on content than on looks. Although the instructor has always stressed content over looks, students creating web-sites
tended to spend much of their time on looks. Since most web-page creation tools allow you to "mess around" easily with
looks, it is only natural that students would find this aspect interesting. In contrast, it is almost painful to "mess around"
with looks on CoWeb. Instead of being a detriment in this case, it was an advantage for learning effectiveness. If CoWeb
usage were not seen as cost effective by the students, they would not have used it for their final projects, and the final
assignment would not have been as effective for learning. So, it is important that instructor and students see a classroom
technology as cost effective. In addition to CoWeb being a good environment for the final projects, instructor 1 observed a
significant cumulative effect--the CoWeb class was already used to concentrating on content.
For   instructor 1, all class  activities, besides   office hours  and  lecture, including grading,   were  conducted   on   CoWeb.
Considering that lecture time was about 50 hours, roughly 40 hours spent on the class outside of lecture during a semester is
quite efficient. The 41 hours observed through system logs also matches closely to instructor 1's self reported time of 2.5
average hours per week spent on CoWeb for the previous term, where the learning effectiveness was closely examined.
While CoWeb's interface is easy to learn and we (the developers) have produced several guides on how to use it in the
classroom, we expect a certain significant cost to be incurred from using a new technology for the first time. As instructor 1
already used     CoWeb     before and had     taught this   course before, her   level of efficiency   (10.00 total-student-time-to-
instructor-time ratio) may have reached a stable efficiency saturation point. In contrast, this was the first time instructor 2
used CoWeb. As such, her total-student-time-to-instructor-time ratio would be expected to rise (slightly) over time, as she
becomes more comfortable with the environment. Also, instructor involvement is highly dependent on teaching style.
Instructor 1 views her CoWeb interaction as setting up the space for the students to work and then letting them "loose." In
contrast, instructor 2's style is one of tighter control of what occurs in the space; she is actively involved in the running of
the activities and likes participating along with the students. This difference in styles might cause instructor 2's saturation
efficiency to be somewhat below instructor 1's. Even with different styles and uses, CoWeb usage remains cost effective
for both instructor and student.

DISCUSSION
Use of CoWeb in the introductory English classes studied is a success, both from a learning perspective (the students were
able to engage the curriculum actively) and a cost perspective (both fixed and variable costs were quite low). Collaborative
learning activities are realizing their potential as a way of leveraging the numbers in the classroom to create a dramatically
improved learning situation without a dramatic rise in costs.
The use of CoWeb in English composition has been remarkably independent of CoWeb development. Using CoWeb for
close reading activities based on literature was invented by Greg VanHoosier-Carey, a fellow professor in the School of
Literature, Communications, and Culture (Collaborative Software Laboratory, 2000). Close readings based on chat session
were  invented   by    the English  101 instructor.  While    we   who developed    CoWeb     provided support  such    as answering
questions and setting up monitoring programs, we did nothing to specify the usage of CoWeb in that domain. So, a simple
collaboration tool (such as CoWeb or Wiki) can allow educators to take ownership of the technology and invent new uses
that will be useful in their domain.
Though performance and learning improved in the collaborative learning case, student effort (time-on-task) remained the
same. Guzdial and Carroll investigated this phenomenon; they found three possible causes for this effect (Guzdial, Carroll,
2002). First, vicarious learning can occur as students view each other's postings and try to understand the issues that their
fellow  classmates     are engaging.  Second,    posting    assignments to   a real audience   (i.e. fellow   learners) provides   an
opportunity for reflection: students think deeply about the content before they post. Third, the on-line environment can
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 442

provide support for and an extension of the in-class activities. By discussing the in-class activities in a forum where each
student has a better chance of being heard, the average class performance is raised. The on-line environment gives students
a clearer understanding of what is expected of them and how the lecture relates to the assignments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding for this project is from the National Science Foundation Grant REC-9814770 and the Mellon Foundation. Our
thanks to our collaborators: Akbar Ladak, Joshua Gargus, Colleen Kehoe, Bolot Kerimbaev, and Kayt Sukel.

REFERENCES
Guzdial, M., Carroll, K. (2002) Explaining the lack of dialogue in computer-supported collaborative learning, Proceedings
       of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 2002. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Guzdial, M., Rick, J., and Kerimbaev, B. (2000) Recognizing and supporting roles in CSCW. Proceedings of CSCW'2000,
       261-268.
Guzdial, M., Rick, J., and Kehoe, C. (2001) Beyond adoption to invention: Teacher-created collaborative activities in
       higher education. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10 (3), 265-279.
Collaborative Software Laboratory (2000) A catalog of CoWeb uses. Georgia Tech GVU Center Technical Report GIT-
       GVU-00-19, Georgia Tech GVU Center.
