Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  443

   Virtual Communication in Middle School Students' and
                                             Teachers' Inquiry
                     Minna Lakkala, Liisa Ilomäki, Jiri Lallimo, Kai Hakkarainen
                                  Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki
                                               Minna.Lakkala@helsinki.fi
ABSTRACT
The aim of the study was to evaluate an innovative learning project in which middle school students and teachers completed
chosen,  group inquiries  through    virtual collaboration   in a  web-based  learning  environment.   The   students' task was  to
accomplish a cross disciplinary inquiry into cultural phenomena. Students worked mainly at home during the project and
took much    responsibility for their own    work  and  course    achievements.  The  investigators   analyzed the  content  of the
students' and teachers' communication in the web-based environment. The findings suggest that the virtual environment
was used as a communication tool for organizing the collaborative work more than as a genuine knowledge-building tool.
Also, the tension between the conventional school culture and the novel working practices apparently affected students'
participation and patterns of activity in the course.

Keywords
Collaborative knowledge building, virtual learning, progressive inquiry, middle school

INTRODUCTION
This study   concentrates   on analyzing  a   virtual inquiry   based  learning project in  middle    school which   differed from
conventional  school  projects    in many    ways.   Middle   school   students worked   mainly    off the   school  premises   and
communicated with each other and with teachers from home through a web-based learning environment. The project was
organized under   a very  wide    inter-disciplinary  concept   of culture, and it integrated students'   work in   several subject
domains and school courses. The project was also untypical in that several teachers from different subject-domains took
part in each group inquiry, jointly carrying out the pedagogical planning, and students' guidance and evaluation.
The teachers had an ambitious goal to introduce students to practices of collaborative knowledge building. Scardamalia and
Bereiter (1994; 1999) have proposed that schools should be restructured towards knowledge-building organizations, in
which students and teachers participate in the construction of collective knowledge as in professional research groups
where the object of activity is solving knowledge-problems. The participating teachers were introduced by the researchers
to the  model  of progressive   inquiry, which   has   been   developed  by  Hakkarainen    and his   colleagues (Hakkarainen    &
Sintonen, in press; Muukkonen, Hakkarainen & Lakkala, 1999) as a pedagogical model for promoting knowledge-building
practices in schools with the support of collaborative technology. In progressive inquiry, students are guided to engage in a
research-like process by defining problems and proposing working theories, using information sources and collaboratively
formulating  new  higher-level    problems   and explanations.     The methods   were  also new    to the teachers,  so they  were
genuinely in a novice's role themselves.
Another background goal for the evaluated project was to advance virtual learning practices on all levels in Finnish schools
(Ministry of Education, 1999). There is a need to develop models for practical applications of technology-supported virtual
learning in real school contexts. Most research and development that has been done on CSCL in lower school levels has
been in face-to-face classroom situations (e.g., Salovaara & Järvelä, 2001). There are fewer studies of the challenges of
collaborative knowledge building in distance learning situations. In this school project, one aim was to give the students an
experience of technology-supported virtual working. The participating students did not belong to a traditional classroom
community, but were gathered together especially for this course. Therefore, the challenges for organizing the learning
community in the project can be compared to the challenges for building virtual communities in general. Elements that
characterize successful   virtual communities    are   e.g., shared   goals and  resources, active    participation and  reciprocal
interaction, sense of belonging, trust in others, and shared context of social conventions (Schuler, 1996; Preece, 2000).
According to Schuler (1996), development of a networked community requires organizing the mechanisms that "describe
the general decision-making, responsibility allocating, and communication methods that will guide the group" (p. 338). In a
study of university students' virtual learning process, Muukkonen et al. (1999) mentioned the issue of community building
as one of the major challenges in using CSCL in education. They argued that to intensively participate in virtual learning
environments, the students need strong community support to help induce them to participate.
The features of the virtual tool used for collaboration are of course important factors in facilitating the process. In this
project the students and teachers used a web-based learning environment, in which the main collaborative tool was a quite
typical threaded  discussion   forum.  The   same    kinds of   forums  are widely  employed    as easy-to-use   tools  in  learning
situations. Guzdial and Turns (2000) have evaluated the effectiveness of the communication in selected virtual discussion
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  444

forums for learning. They defined three necessary conditions for demonstrating whether the activity in the networked
discussion supports learning: The discussion should be sustained (which they evaluated from the length of discussion
threads), it should have broad participation and it should focus on class topics.
A third important dimension in studying innovations in schools is the effect of the whole conventional school culture on the
new, collaborative process. As Engeström, Engeström and Suntio (in preparation) presented in their study of school change
in the framework of cultural-historical activity theory, there are deep structural constraints in developing the school: Socio-
spatial structure of  the school  work    (separate classrooms,   teachers  working  alone,   isolation of the   school from  the
environment), temporal structure (discrete and short lessons, test and grading phases etc.) and motivational and ethical
structure (grading as a main motivational method). Bielaczyc (2001) has stated that the central challenge in implementing
CSCL    in schools  lies  in creating  the appropriate  social   infrastructure for collaborative  activity. She   defines  social
infrastructure as having three levels: 1) A cultural level includes classroom culture and philosophy and norms established;
2) an activity level comprises the classroom practices and online activities in the process; 3) a tool level defines, how the
participants structure the technological environment and use the possibilities of the CSCL tool. In the evaluated project the
teachers' intention was deliberately to surpass the limits of the classroom and restrictions of separate subject domains, but
they still acted in a conventional school context with no extra resources or changes in the official curriculum.
In summary, the framework for analyzing the challenges of the virtual school project was found in the interaction and
contradictions of three elements, as Figure 1 describes.

                                      Progressive inquiry goals
Contradictions such as difficulties in
modeling the inquiry process or
problems in evaluation.
                                                                                    Contradictions such as problems in
understanding the meaning
         Conventional school culture                              of sharing knowledge, or concentration on practical
                                                                                    process organization issues instead of
epistemic inquiry.
Contradictions such as
challenges of self-directness, or
problems in organizing the
learning community.
                                                                           Virtual collaboration
                                 Figure 1. Dimensions for examining the virtual school project.
Research questions that are based upon the framework were as follows: 1) How was the socially shared character of inquiry
realized in the participants'  technology-supported    communication?    2) What    additional elements    did the virtuality and
distance work   bring into   the  inquiry process?  3) How    did the virtual   inquiry practices fit with   the demands   of the
conventional school culture?

METHODS
Setting and participants
The evaluated 'Culture course' was organized in Alppila School, which is a middle school in the city of Helsinki. The
school is quite advanced and active in developing learning and teaching methods: The emphasis in all teaching is on
cultural aspects of the phenomena under study; the studying is organized through courses that meet periodically, not fixed
classes; the school has participated in various research and development projects for several years.
The investigated project had, at the end, 14 student participants (age 15-16) and 7 teachers (computer science, biology and
geography, religion, history and philosophy, arts, music, Finnish language). The students volunteered to participate in the
course. They were all quite high achieving and were meant to complete several regular school courses by participating in
the Culture course. It was the students' last spring in the obligatory lower secondary school. The teachers did not participate
full-time in the course, but were at the same time responsible for other school courses as usual. The computer teacher was a
coordinator of the whole project; other teachers participated as experts and tutors of their own subject domain.
The goal of the Culture course was to deepen students' (and teachers') conception of culture, to give students an opportunity
to get  experience of  distance   learning and to   introduce  students to  the  progressive  inquiry   approach.  Students  were
encouraged to produce an innovative cultural product as a final work of the course, not just a traditional project report. The
students decided among themselves the actual topic of their inquiry. They worked mainly off the school premises during
the course. There were seven common meetings at school, otherwise the students communicated through the web-based
learning environment   from   home,   or  arranged  face-to-face meetings   with their  small  group  members    and the guiding
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  445

teachers. The actual distance-working period lasted seven weeks from February to April, but the whole project started two
months beforehand with some preliminary meetings.
The technology used in the course was a web-based collaborative software called Virtual Web School (VWS) designed by
the Media Center of the Helsinki City Department of Education. A typical threaded discussion forum was the main tool for
organizing the discourse. In addition, the learning environment included a chat tool and a text-based portfolio for students'
private products, but they were not in active use in this course. It was not possible, for instance, to share documents through
the VWS.

Data collection
The data that have been analyzed in this study included the database notes posted to the VWS environment during the
course. Five (out of seven) joint meetings in school were observed and videotaped by the researchers. One researcher
participated to two teacher meetings, where teachers planned the organization of the course. In addition we obtained various
materials about course accomplishments, final works and written course evaluations.

Data analysis
Several quantitative measures of the features of the virtual discourse ­ such as number of the postings, distribution of
postings in time, and length of the discussion threads ­ were counted from the discussion threads in the VWS.
The postings to the VWS database were also analyzed qualitatively using the methods of qualitative content analysis (see
Chi, 1997) to evaluate the patterns of collaboration in the virtual learning community. The unit of analysis was one message
or posting. Messages were categorized according to the main content of the message text: what appeared to be the main
purpose or object of the posting in the discourse. The categories were derived from the several preliminary analyses of the
data. The following five were used in the final classification:
1) Content      of  the   inquiry: These messages represented students' problems, thoughts and explanations of the
inquiry topics and subject domain concepts, descriptions of the content of their inquiry, and teachers' content-specific
guidance.
2) Community       building: Messages in this category represented general discussion relating to the common purpose of
the learning community (progressive inquiry, collaborative work, accomplishing inquiry about culture), communication
about the ways of using the virtual tools (organizing the forums, using sensible titles), and social aspects of the community
(arranging a common meeting room, invitations to participate actively to virtual work).
3) Process      organization: Messages in this category included communication that was needed for organizing the
inquiry work of separate small groups (arranging meetings, asking help or comments, telling about information sources,
making agreements of task completion).
4) Course    evaluation: Messages in this category included questions, agreements and arguments about the rules for
completing the project work, criteria for course grading and general timetables or deadlines.
5) Other   issues: Messages put into this category included conversation about other topics or school activity unrelated
to the project tasks, and nonsense test messages written by students in the practicing phase.
Each message was classified in only one of the content categories, according to its main content. Content analysis was
performed  using   ATLAS/ti-program.    To analyze   the  reliability  of classification,  an  independent   coder classified
approximately 17% of all messages (randomly selected message threads from a general forum and all the messages from
one group forum); the coefficient for rater agreement (Cohen's Kappa) was .85, which was considered satisfactory.
Other  material and  observational data from   the course meetings    and  teacher meetings    were used  as complementary
information to get an overview of the process, and to interpret the communication in the virtual environment in a larger
context.

RESULTS
Structure and organization of the course
Below is a description of the structure and phases of the course.

Preliminary phase
The whole project started in the middle of December with a 1½-hour meeting in the school, when teachers introduced the
course and its objectives to students. Students seemed to be insecure about the requirements and goals of the project. At
least four high-achieving girl students who had originally reported to the project withdrew from it in the first meeting. They
stated that it is 'safer' to work in traditional courses because they wanted to get the highest degrees to their final middle
school report.  In the middle of January,  the computer   teacher   gave  the participants a  training session on  the VWS-
environment. Also the reasons for using the collaborative tool were discussed, and the general forum entitled 'Small talk'
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 446

was founded for practicing. The teacher gave students a task to write their individual inquiry plans to the VWS forum
entitled 'Working plans and starting theories' before the next meeting. In the beginning of February, the philosophy teacher
arranged a brainstorming session in the school, meeting hall. Students planned the content of their inquiry work in the
framework of various cultural dimensions (past-present-future, fact-fiction, etc.). Also discussed were decisions about the
small groups,  tutoring teachers  and school courses that the students would  complete. After the    meeting the students
continued the planning virtually in the VWS.

1st week
The fourth school period started in the middle of February when the students started their actual distance work. In the first
week, the computer teacher gave a lecture about progressive inquiry at school; students formed small groups and decided
the topics of their group's inquiry. The students formed 7 groups and formulated the following research topics: Biological
effects of music (2 boys), Life in the Middle Ages (2 boys), Effects of genes and environment on a Finnish-Australian girls'
life (2 girls), Japanese culture (1 girl alone), American Indian culture (2 boys), Comparison of Finnish and Canadian
cultures (2 girls) and Aspects of religion and society (3 boys). Each group had a main, tutoring teacher, but all the teachers
were  meant to guide all  students and  give support especially to those students who were completing    courses in their
teaching subject. The students had chosen 2-6 school courses that they would complete by participating in the Culture
course. At the end of the first week the students had another working session in the computer lab. Their task was to write to
the VWS their group's research questions and starting theories, and comment on other groups' plans.
From 2nd to 6th week
During the next five weeks (from the end of February to the beginning of April) students did independent work and
organized their group processes using the VWS. In the second week separate, specific discussion forums were founded for
every group (everybody was allowed to participate freely in the group forums and the common forums). Students were
guided to start the investigation of their research questions. During these weeks, students processed their work in their
respective group forums but also discussed issues in joint forums. In addition they had face-to-face meetings with their own
group and the tutoring teachers.
7th and 8th week
In the seventh week (in the beginning of April) there was a common face-to-face meeting, in which the groups commented
on the state of each other's work. The teachers guided the students to think about high points and new interesting aspects in
each group's inquiry work. After that day the small groups continued their process, mostly finishing their final work and
making plans about how to present it in the closing event. In the last week (in the middle of April) there was a 4-hour
closing event at the meeting hall. Each group presented its final work in a different way. The Middle Ages group had made
a radio play; the Canada group had written an imaginary diary of a school girl who was visiting Canada as an exchange
student. At the end of the week the students were called to school once more to write their evaluation of the course for the
researchers. In the Culture course the students received credit for 61 courses in all, according to the agreements; 4.4 courses
per student on average.

Amount of activity and threading of the virtual discourse
The participants posted 534 messages to the VWS database during the project (minimum was 3 messages of a boy student;
maximum, 81 messages of a male teacher). Students (N = 14) posted 308 messages (Mean = 22.0, SD = 29.9) and teachers
(N = 7) posted 226 messages (Mean = 32.3, SD = 26.0). Some of the messages were written by two or three students
together. In the joint forum entitled 'Small talk' were 168 messages; in the 'Plans and theories' forum, 113 messages; and in
seven, group forums there were 253 messages in all. In Figure 2 one can see how the volume of messaging varied in
discussion forums during the course.
            Prel. phase
                          Week1
                                  Week2
                                           Week3
                                                   Week4
                                                            Week5
                                                                     Week6
                                                                           Week7&8
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page  447

             70
             60
             50
                                                                                             'Small talk' forum
             40
                                                                                             'Plans and theories' forum
             30
                                                                                             Group forums
             20
             10
               0

                          Figure 2. The number of messages in the discussion forums in course weeks.
In the beginning of the project, only the two general forums were in use. As Figure 2 shows, in the first, course week, the
work was concentrated on the 'Plans and theories' forum according to the teachers' instructions. After the second week, the
communication was transferred mainly to the group forums, and it was most active in the middle of the course.
In all the virtual forums together, there were 218 top-level messages (41% of all messages), which were considered as new
initiations in the discourse.    Of those messages,  97  (44%)    were isolated messages   that did not   have    any comments
following, and 121 (56%) were messages that had at least one comment; e.g., they had started a new discussion thread.
Mean number of messages in discussion threads (in the threads that included at least two messages) was 3.63 (SD = 2.15).
The longest thread included 14 messages, and only three threads had more than ten messages. Studies from the elementary
level (Lipponen et al., 2001) and university level (Guzdial & Turns, 2000) have given the same kind of results; that, in
general, the discourse threads in virtual forums are quite short, which indicates that the inquiry, insofar as it is accurately
reflected in the postings, is not very sustained or convergent.
There was a big difference in the use of each group's forum. Minimum number of postings in one forum was 13; maximum
was 56. Mean number of postings in all group forums was 38.2 (SD = 14.9). We also counted the number of postings that
the students sent to the forums of other groups. Only 8 (out of 253) messages in the group forums were written by students
from the other groups; all other messages were written by the students of that group or by the teachers. After forming the
small groups, the students obviously concentrated on their own work and did not contribute to other groups' work, although
they where encouraged to do so.

Content of the virtual communication
Each posting to the VWS discussion forums was assigned to one of the content categories described earlier. The original
goal of the project was to use the technology to support sharing and building of knowledge, which means sharing theories
and explanations of cultural aspects in the students' inquiry. According to the content analysis, only 180 (34%) of the
postings were    about    the Content of  inquiry. The   frequencies of other   content categories  were  as    follows: Process
organization messages 129 (24%), Community building messages 105 (20%), messages about Course evaluation 67 (12%),
and messages about Other issues 67 (10%).
The discussion forums obviously had different roles in the communication of the learning community. In the 'Small talk'
forum half (50%) of the postings were community building messages, and about 25% were messages about issues unrelated
to the common course goals. In the other joint discussion forum, the 'Plans and theories' forum, 64% of the postings were
about the content of inquiry. In the seven group forums most of the communication was about the content of inquiry (42%)
or process organization (42%).
The content of communication varied remarkably during the successive weeks of the course (Figure 3).
          Prel. phase
                        Week1
                                  Week2
                                             W
                                              eek3
                                                      Week4
                                                                Week5
                                                                           W
                                                                            eek6
                                                                                  Weeks7&8
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   448

            100 %
             90 %
             80 %                                                                                Community building
             70 %
             60 %                                                                                Content of inquiry
             50 %                                                                                Process organization
             40 %30 %                                                                            Course evaluation
             20 %                                                                                Other issues
             10 %
               0%

               Figure 3. Change in the content of postings to the VWS discussion forums during the project.
As can be seen from Figure 3, in the beginning of the project, issues that were important for building up the learning
community   (common      objectives  and  working  methods)   were   dominant  in  the virtual communication.    There     were
discussions about how to use the virtual tools, the importance of collaboration, and also plans to organize a joint working
room for the course members in the school. Here is an example of messages assigned to the category of community
building:
      18.01.2000       14.45.04     About   this  Culture    course   (Thomas,    boy   student)
      This   is    a  fine   system,    but   ... the  possibility      for   real-time    discussion     is  still
      missing?        Maybe  an IRC-channel?      For  instance     #alppila   #culturecourse
      #alppila_culturecourse            ...   And then   we  need   of  course   a  bot  program   to   keep   the
      channel      going,    does   anyone    have a  possibility     to   supply   one?
      Waiting      for   answers...
              18.01.2000      14.51.07     We  need   that  later,    we are   not  here   [at  school]    all  the    time
              (Hannah,      girl  student)
              It   is   true  that   it   would   be  useful  because    we   need  conversation,      and   it's    not
              always     sensible    to   use  the  telephone.     This  discussion     forum   is  good,    but    it will
              probably      be  more   differentiated;      now  this   functions    as  a  discussion     medium.     I
              support     your  idea!
The number of messages about other issues unrelated to the Culture course was large in the preliminary phase, probably
because then the students and the teachers were practicing their use of the virtual environment. In the session in which the
participants were trained to use the VWS environment, 42% (27) of the posted messages were classified as community
building messages, and 32% (21) as messages about other issues. Teachers did not direct the first practices with the VWS to
content-related inquiry work (a notice from a videotaped training session).
The number of messages in the content of inquiry category was largest in the first week of the course period, when there
was also   another hands-on    session in the school. In that period students  were guided  explicitly to define    their plans,
questions  and starting  theories of their inquiry to the  virtual forums. The  following  is an example   of content-related
discourse:
      17.02.2000       19.37.53     Problems,    group   A (John,    boy   student)
      1.   How  have     the different      cultures   affected     the  development     of   humans?
      2.   How  have     the cultures      spread  out   in  the   world   and how  have   they   affected     each
      other?
      3.   Collaboration       with    Thomas:
      What   were     the  basic    differences    between    the   culture   of  American     Indians    and  the
      western      culture??
      What   affected      the  disappearance      of  Indians?
      How   did    the   Indians'    nature-based     culture    work?
      4.   What    is  the  Islamic     culture   like   actually?    Is   it as  bad   as the   media    represent       it?
              18.02.2000      13.46.40     A  comment   (Mathew,    boy  student)
              Good     start,   just   continue!
              18.02.2000      13.43.31     Large   topics...    (Hannah,    girl   student)
              Large     topics...    good   topics...    the  effects    of   cultures   on   human  development,         you
              should     consider    what   things    to examine...     the   appearance,     ways  of  life,   economic
              state,     environment...       it  might  be   difficult    to  examine   everything.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page       449

             Effects   on  each   other   or the   spreading...     very  good   topic,  but      it is   quite
             difficult,    at  least   those   effects...    should    you examine   some      special    culture?
             Indians...    on  the  other   hand,   if  you  have   these  large   topics      also,   that  topic        is
             quite   restricted    to  a  certain   place   and  it  is  also  a  small  one...      but  it  is  also
             interesting.
             About   that  Islamic    religion    I cannot   say  much.
Especially later in the course most of the content messages were about designing the content of the final work. Here is an
example of the message from the Australian group:
      23.03.2000    11.09.22    Answer   Sorry,    if...(Ann,   girl   student)
      ...  sorry   that   we did  not  discuss     with  you  before   the  course   about      including    the
      topics   of  religion   into   our  work.    But  we have   a lot   of material   about      that   topic.
      First   we are   going  to  tell   about    the religion    of aboriginals,     totems      and  'dreamtime'
      and  its  myths.    In addition    we  are   going  to  compare   their   attitudes       towards   life  to
      ours,   and  to  examine,   how  they   experience     our  religion   and  our  God.      We  thought   also        to
      include   something    about   Jesus...
Teachers' content-related postings were mostly guidance for the inquiry process. For example:
      29.02.2000     08.39.28   I want   information     (Peter,    philosophy   teacher)
      Do  you  remember,     that I  asked   the   other   day for   a list  of  your  beliefs       and  conceptions
      about   the  Middle    Ages.  I thought,     that  BEFORE   you  start   to read   Litzen's      book   etc.,
      you  should    write   your conceptions      about   what  the Middle    Ages  are      either   as a  mind  map
      or  as  an  idea   list.  It  can  be  a  quite   long   list. Is   Xena   medieval?      What   about  Conan?
      You  understand     the usefulness     of   this,  don't   you?  Don't   be afraid       of  possible
      "mistakes"     ­ in  this   work  you  cannot    make  them.
According to the analysis, very little of the content-specific discussion was actual conceptual discourse or formulation of
research questions and explanations. The students and the teachers did not actually use the virtual environment very much
as a forum for collaborative knowledge building, or for sharing of knowledge productions. Most of the content-related
knowledge construction probably happened in face-to-face meetings with the group members and the tutoring teachers, not
through the VWS.
In the VWS the amount of process organization messages increased after the small groups were formed, and it continued to
increase towards the end of the course. Many of the process organization messages handled daily, practical things such as
arranging meetings or explaining activities to be done. The following is an example of process organization discourse in the
Music group:
      09.03.2000     17.09.11   How   are you   (Susan,    music  teacher)
      What   is  the   situation   in  the  research    about   the  biological   effects       of  music,   or  are
      you  still   planning    it.  Regards,    Susan
             09.03.2000    22.48.04    Thanks,    very  well...(Jerry,     boy   student)
             we  have  started    the  research,    but  because    the  music   made  Mike     sick,   we  have  to
             "run"   in  the  same  place    for  a while.
                   13.03.2000     10.32.44    Sharing   the  work   (Rita,   computer   teacher)
                   Would   it  be  useful    to  share  your   work  so  that  if  the  one     is   sick,  the  other
                   can   somehow   continue    the   work  before   the  time  runs   out.
During the course the students prepared a presentation of their course work and presented it in the closing event. Planning
of the concrete presentation was also one dominant theme in the process organization messages. The discussions were more
like those in traditional school projects where the form of the end product starts to dominate as the object of the work.
Toward the end of the course, questions about course evaluation, rules and study criteria started to interest the students
more, and it seemed to have been a problem that the criteria were not clearly specified in the beginning. The original goals
of the course had been quite advanced ideas about knowledge building and progressive inquiry, but towards the end the
teachers and the students had to enter into agreement about course completion according to the curriculum. One of the
longest and 'hottest' discussion threads (12 messages) in the virtual environment was about course evaluation and deadlines
for the work. For example, one girl student had problems with understanding the idea of getting comments and revising the
work:
      30.03.2000    08.03.12    Returning    the   work  (Peter,   philosophy    teacher)
      Well,   simply:   you  bring   on  the  5th   the work   you  have.  Some   groups      may  be  so  ready,         that
      nothing    can  be  added  to  the  work.    Most  of  the  works   consist   of several       parts.   At least
      some   parts  may   possibly   be  improved?     Maybe  there  is   something   to      add,  or to  correct?
      Why  do  you  think    that you   cannot    change   the work  that    has been  returned?       This   is not        a
      final   exam.
      Peter
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page  450

              01.04.2000     16.06.18      It cannot    be    changed,    and     that's    it!  (Ann,   female      student)
              Our  work     is  either   ready,    or then     it is   not.     It    is a  sound   whole,      a story,   and
              there    are   two  options:    either    we    return   it   as    a   whole   or we  don't      return  it  at
              all.
Two female students even refused to come to the evaluation meeting after the course had ended because they had not yet
come   to an agreement   with   the teachers  about their course    grades. There     was  an  obvious contradiction   between the
traditions and demands of the conventional school culture and the new goals of virtual, collaborative inquiry work.

Differences in the students' and the teachers' contribution to virtual communication
We wanted to examine whether there were differences in the students' and the teachers' activity in the virtual collaboration.
The evaluated project was suitable for comparing students and teachers because there were so many teachers involved
compared to the number of students, although most teachers' contribution to the project was rather small.
In Table 1 are presented the general frequencies and proportions of each message content category in the students' and the
teachers' messages. The general content profiles did not differ much (correlation of the distribution was 0.71). According to
2-test there was a significant difference between the groups (2 = 26.8, df = 4, p<.001). Cell-specific exact tests (Bergman
& El-Khouri, 1987) were carried out in order to examine whether the observed frequencies in each cell deviated from what
could be expected by chance alone.

Table 1. Contents of the students' and the teachers' messages in the VWS discourse forums.
                                 Students (N = 14)        Teachers (N = 7)
          Content category               f        %               f       %
          Content of inquiry           104       34             76        34
          Community building            65       21             40        18
          Process organization         55*       18            74         33
          Course evaluation             40       13             27        12
          Other issues                  44       14             9*          4
          Total                        308      100            226     100
          Note. Significance tests are based on binomial probability estimations (Bergman & El-Khouri, 1987);
          * = Observed frequency smaller than expected by chance alone (p < .01);
           = Observed frequency larger than expected by chance alone (p < .01).

The results indicated that in the virtual communication, the teachers concentrated more than the students on organizing the
group processes, although we expected that the teachers would take more responsibility for the advancement of epistemic
and content-specific inquiry. Also intriguing is that both the teachers and the students took responsibility for organizing the
work of the whole virtual community and keeping the virtual work active. A quite expected result is that the students had
more postings than teachers, of other than project-related issues.
Another indication of the teachers' strong efforts to organize the group work through the virtual environment was the high
proportion of the teachers' postings to the small groups' discussion forums. Teachers had written 57% (145) of the 253
messages in the group forums. Obviously, the students themselves did not use the virtual tool for their own collaboration,
but did the actual work in face-to-face meetings. The virtual tool was used more as a communication channel between the
students and the teachers.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this investigation we analyzed how middle school students and teachers succeeded in practicing virtual collaborative
inquiry. We wanted to document the challenges encountered in applying new ways of working and to find indications of
emerging innovative pedagogical practices. As Windschitl (1998) pointed out, qualitative research approaches are valuable
in investigating phenomena in novel fields, such as technology-supported virtual learning applied in schools. The evaluated
school  project succeeded   in  surpassing many    structural constraints   in  the   school. Both the students    and the teachers
participated very enthusiastically and were motivated to experiment with progressive inquiry and virtual collaboration. The
students took much responsibility for their distant work and completed many middle school courses from subject domains
during the project. The final products of the small groups were large, multidisciplinary and unique cultural products.
First, we  were  interested  in the realization of  collaborative   inquiry in    the technology-supported     communication.  The
features of progressive inquiry and joint knowledge construction were more obvious in the beginning of the course, when
the teachers explicitly directed the virtual process towards formulation of research questions and theories about the cultural
phenomena. Later in the course the web-based learning environment was not used for actual building of knowledge objects
or for sharing expertise; the virtual communication (of both the students and the teachers) changed towards the organization
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  451

of practical task-accomplishment issues. There are probably several reasons for this change. The organization of the course
in sub-groups that had very divergent topics reduced the necessity for joint, knowledge sharing in the whole learning
community. The web-based learning environment used did not have very sophisticated tools for higher-level knowledge
building: the main collaborative tool was a threaded discussion forum, which did not allow sharing and modifying of joint
digital artifacts, or did not include advanced built-in scaffolds for inquiry as CSILE (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1994) or
Future Learning Environment (Muukkonen et al., 1999). In addition, the students would obviously have needed more
scaffolding in progressive inquiry, and more attention should have been given to the conceptual and theoretical goals of the
course.
Second, we wanted to evaluate how the virtuality affected the inquiry process. Virtual work evidently needs a different kind
of organization than CSCL practiced in face-to-face classroom situations. The great amount of communication concerning
community-building issues in the beginning of the project indicates the necessity, mentioned by Schuler (1996), to make
agreements of the collective work habits. Actually, in the virtual interaction, the students themselves quite skillfully took
responsibility for issues of shared goals and social conventions. All the participants contributed to the virtual discourse, but
the participation was quite unevenly distributed. The discourse was either not very sustained or not very topic-centered. The
great number of process organization messages, especially in the small groups' forums showed that virtual collaborative
inquiry needs   a  communication  channel     also for practical coordination of  the work. More   like  epistemic inquiry,   the
communication resembled patterns of design process, as in a virtual project of textile students studied by Lahti, Seitamaa-
Hakkarainen and Hakkarainen (2001), where over 20% of students' postings to a virtual learning environment were about
process organization.
Third, we were interested in seeing how the virtual inquiry practices fit in the demands of the conventional school culture.
The incompatibility of the new working methods and the school culture emerged as an important issue in the course. To
begin with, some students withdrew from the whole course because they felt uncertain about getting the highest degrees in
that way. Also, in spite of the high-level goals of the course for accomplishing collaborative multi-disciplinary inquiry, the
teachers still had to grade students' work according to courses in the official curriculum. Based on the content analysis of
the virtual discussions, we concluded that the lack of explicitly defined criteria in the beginning of the course caused
problems to students both in planning the content of inquiry and in the timing of the work. In addition, the time of the
course was not ideal for radical experimentation because the students were worried about their grades in the final, middle
school report.
The participants had two demanding new challenges in the project at the same time: progressive inquiry and virtual work. A
better structured process with commonly known and accepted goals, rules, and evaluation principles may have helped
students to carry out a more profound inquiry process. If the participants had been more low-achieving students, they would
have needed even more support and guidance. In general, children should have a possibility of practicing new working
methods safely at school without the demands of grading; and growing up to a modern, knowledge building culture has to
happen gradually throughout the whole school life.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The first author was supported by grant from the Finnish Cultural Foundation.

REFERENCES
Bergman,    L. &   El-Khouri, B. (1987).   Exacon:   A  Fortran  77 program   for the exact analysis  of single case   cells in a
         contingency table. Educational and Psychological measurement, 47, 155­161.
Bielaczyc,   K.   (2001) Designing    Social  Infrastructure:   The  Challenge    of  Building Computer-Supported      Learning
         Communities. In Dillenbourg, P., Eurelings, A. & Hakkarainen, K. (Eds.) European Perspectives on Computer-
         Supported Collaborative Learning. Proceedings of the First European Conference on CSCL, March 22-24, 2001,
         University of Maastricht, the Netherlands.
Chi, M.T.H.    (1997). Quantifying  qualitative    analyses of verbal data: A  practical guide.  The  Journal  of  the Learning
         Sciences, 6, 271­315.
Guzdial, M. & Turns, J. (2000). Effective Discussion Through a Computer-Mediated Anchored Forum. The Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 9(4), 437­469.
Engeström, Y., Engeström, R. & Suntio, A. (in preparation). Can a school community learn to master its own future? An
         activity-theoretical    study    for   expansive      learning   among      middle    school    teachers.   Available:
         http://www2.ucsc.edu/people/gwells/CHATbook/Engetal.html.
Hakkarainen,    K. &   Sintonen, M.   (in  press)  Interrogative approach  on inquiry   and computer-supported     collaborative
         learning. Science & Education.
Lahti,  H., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen,   P.,   &   Hakkarainen,   K.  (2001). The  nature  of collaboration   in computer-supported
         designing.  In  Dillenbourg,  P., Eurelings,  A.   &  Hakkarainen, K. (Eds.)   European  Perspectives    on Computer-
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  452

         Supported Collaborative Learning. Proceedings of the First European Conference on CSCL, March 22-24, 2001,
         University of Maastricht, the Netherlands.
Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., Lallimo, J., & Hakkarainen, K. (2001). Analyzing patterns of participation and discourse in
         elementary students' online science  discussion.  In  P.  Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings,    &  K.  Hakkarainen   (Eds.),
         European  perspectives  on computer-supported    collaborative learning. The  proceedings   of the   First European
         Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 421­428). University of Maastricht.
Ministry of Education (1991). Education, Training and Research in the Information Society. A National Strategy for 2000-
         2004. Available: http://www.minedu.fi
Muukkonen, H., Hakkarainen, K. & Lakkala, M. (1999). Collaborative Technology for Facilitating Progressive Inquiry:
         Future Learning Environment   Tools.  In   C. Hoadley  &  J. Roschelle (Eds.) The     proceedings of the   CSCL  '99
         conference, December 12-15, 1999, Palo Alto (pp. 406­415). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
Preece, J. (2000) Online communities. Designing Usability, Supporting Sociability. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, West Sussex,
         England.
Salovaara, H. & Järvelä, S. (2001) CSCL in secondary school literature class - focus on students' strategic actions. In P.
         Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings, & K. Hakkarainen (Eds.), European perspectives on computer-supported collaborative
         learning. The proceedings of the First European Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp.
         537­544). University of Maastricht.
Scardamalia M.   &  Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer      support for knowledge-building  communities.     The   Journal  of the
         Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265­283.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1999) Schools as knowledge-building organizations. In D. Keating & C. Hertzman (Eds.),
         Today's children, tomorrow's society: The developmental health and wealth of nations (pp. 274-289). New York:
         Guilford. Available: http://csile.oise.utoronto.ca/abstracts/ciar-understanding.html
Schuler, D. (1996). New  Community    Networks.     Wired for  Change.  New York,   NY:  ACM      Press &  Addison-Wesley
         Publishing Company.
Windschitl, M. (1998). The WWW and Classroom Research: What Path Should We Take? Educational Researcher, 27(1),
         28­33.
