Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page     463

M. (TECHNOLOGY TRACK): ISSUES OF REPRESENTATION IN CSCL

   The Effect of Representations on Communication and
                  Product during Collaborative Modeling
                                      Simone Löhner, Wouter van Joolingen
                                   Graduate School of Teaching and Learning
                                              University of Amsterdam
                                      simone@ilo.uva.nl, wouter@ilo.uva.nl
ABSTRACT
In this paper we investigate the effect of different external representations on the process and product of collaborative
computer modeling tasks. Shared representations can significantly influence the processes of modeling and communication.
In order to find the specific benefits of two different representations, we compare pairs working on a collaborative
modeling task using a text based model representation with others using a graphical representation. The learners, secondary
school students, used the modeling representation for two hours working on a task in the domain of physics. Results
indicate that the two representations support different phases of the modeling process.
Keywords
Computer modeling, representations, simulation, collaboration

INTRODUCTION
Computer modeling and CSCL are two applications of information technology in education that have recently become
more and more important. In the study presented in this paper we investigate the combination of working collaboratively
(in this case in a face-to-face setting) and constructing runnable dynamic models.
The creation and manipulation of models by learners is increasingly recognized as a potentially powerful technique within
constructive learning environments (Mandinach, 1988). In modeling environments, learners create executable models of
phenomena in, for instance, physics or biology. This requires coordination and integration of facts with scientific theory
rather than a   mere passive  collection  of facts and    formulas  (Hestenes, 1987).   Because  a model   is a  conceptual
representation of a real system that behaves in accordance with physical laws, creating models will help learners focus on
conceptual  reconstruction of reality and  thus help constructing   a unified and  coherent view  of science  (Doerr,     1995;
Hestenes, 1987).
Model building has been associated with constructing accurate and appropriate mental models. Through model building
learners are able to `run' their own mental model of a phenomenon (Jackson, Stratford, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1996) and it
provides a way of asking whether they can understand their own way of thinking about a problem (Doerr, 1995).
When   learners construct  their models  collaboratively, there is an extra benefit, because they  also have  to make      their
assumptions about the model relation they are working on explicit before adding it to the model. Modeling environments
then serve as a shared artifact with which and about which discussion and co-construction of knowledge can be shaped. In
this paper we focus on the role of a modeling environment as a collaborative workspace. One important property of such a
workspace is the shared representation that is used to build the models. We discuss the properties of these representations
and present an experimental study in which we compare two representations for models
Different ways of modeling
We distinguish   two major    categories of  modeling in   education,  expressive  modeling  and  explorative modeling.      In
expressive modeling learners try to externalize their thoughts about a domain by creating a model. Therefore expressive
modeling makes ones mental models explicit, serving as a means for communication and negotiation of ideas. In expressive
modeling there is no concept of a "correct" or "best" model. This can be the case where systems are considered for which
no reference model is known or available or for which the model is too complicated to understand in detail, by the learners
involved. Examples are models of populations, where the goal is to create and understand phenomena like the forming of
clusters of population, with no claim that the model accurately describes the real world phenomena. The focus is on global
understanding of phenomena and on the modeling process itself, and not so much on the rules of the domain.
In explorative modeling learners try to find a specific target model of a given domain. The target model is (more or less
explicitly) present in the learning environment for example in the form of data or a simulation of the system to be modeled.
The goal of explorative modeling is finding the rules governing the phenomenon under investigation using induction and
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  464

thereby  demonstrating  an   understanding    of the domain   that is being  modeled.   In  our research  we  aim  at explorative
modeling. Learners collaboratively construct a model that explains given empirical data. Learners can retrieve the data that
should be explained from a computer simulation that is also available in the environment. They can do experiments with a
simulation and collect the data that can be compared with the output of the model they produce. Special to the situation is
that in addition to the learner's model also the system model that can generate the data, is present in the environment,
although it is not presented to the learner in an explicit way.

Representations and collaboration
Model representations are a means to construct models, but representations also serve as a vehicle for thought. External
representations are not simply inputs and stimuli to the internal mind; rather they are so intrinsic to many cognitive tasks
that they guide, constrain and even determine cognitive behavior and the way the mind functions (Zhang, 1997). Zhang
calls this phenomenon 'representational determinism'. Zhang did his research on the influence of representation in problem
solving activities, but we believe his conclusions will also hold for modeling tasks.
As representations play a role in supporting, guiding and constraining the cognitive processes in model building, we can
also assume that they will have a strong influence on the way learners will communicate and collaborate when constructing
models together. Suthers (1999) states: ,,...the mere presence of representations in a shared context with collaborating
agents  may  change    each individual's cognitive   processes.   One  person  can   ignore discrepancies   between thought  and
external representations,   but an individual    working   in   a group must   constantly   refer back   to the  shared  external
representation while coordinating activities with others...'' (p.612). Tools in which learners can organize their knowledge,
mediate collaborative learning discourse by providing the means to articulate emerging knowledge in a persistent medium,
inspectable by all participants, where the knowledge then becomes part of the shared context.
As  external  representations can  be tools   for  enabling and    directing reasoning  processes, the   representation used  for
describing the model the learners are creating, is of paramount relevance to the way learners will engage in the modeling
task. In (Löhner & Van Joolingen, 2001) a review is presented of several representations that are used in different modeling
tools on the market, and an analysis is made of the different aspects of these representations. A distinction is made between
the primary representation (text or graphics), qualitative or quantitative representations, primary model entities (variables or
relations), the way complex relations are handled (by the modeler or by the system), the visibility of the simulation engine
(need for programming by the learner), the amount of information that can be externalized and the amount of scaffolding a
representation gives by preventing inconsistencies.
From the description of the characteristics it will be clear that representations can determine the modeling and collaboration
processes to a rather large extent: representations determine the nature of the model that is constructed, e.g. qualitative or
quantitative, and the process leading to it, e.g. by suggesting relations or offering sensible defaults.
Also it  is clear that there is a trade-off   between  the  various  characteristics of the  representations. For  instance, it is
impossible to let learners focus simultaneously on the structure of the model and the details of the relations constructed in a
single representation. Choosing a graphical overview means emphasizing the qualitative model characteristics, choosing
text implies a focus on the quantitative details of the relations. If the goal is to let the learner do both, the representation
must offer different views of the model, like a zoom function on relations and/or variables. These are so called multiple
external representations (MER's) (Ainsworth, 1999). Ainsworth shows that different representations used simultaneously
can constrain  each  other's  interpretation, construct deeper    understanding  or  complement    each  other. In  modeling  for
example the interpretation of a qualitative graphical model can be constrained by a quantitative textual model. The problem
with MER's however is that, as Ainsworth shows, learners find it difficult to translate between the different representations.
There is also a trade-off between the ease of use of a representation and the expression power. An easy to use modeling
representation may always yield a running model but the level of expression can probably not go deeper than semi-
quantitative relations. A deeper specification could break down the internal simulation mechanism.
The two uses of modeling we identify, seem to put different requirements on the representations used for constructing the
models. In the case of expressive modeling the optimal representation seems to emphasize qualitative views on the model
and relations in the model also should be expressed qualitatively. Conversely, representations for explorative modeling
should allow quantitative statements and should allow the system to generate quantitative data. However, the case is a bit
more complicated. For some qualitative phenomena to occur in a model sometimes a more detailed specification of the
model relation is necessary, for instance when phenomena depend on parameter values. In this case only qualitative input
and output is not enough. On the other hand, qualitative representations used in models of a quantitative nature can help the
learner in organizing the model and be an aid in finding the relations that should be specified.

THE MODELING ENVIRONMENT
In this paper we describe collaborative modeling by learners in a learning environment consisting of a simulation window
and a modeling window (see Figure 13). The environment was built in SimQuest, an authoring system for discovery
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                    page 465

learning simulations (Van Joolingen & De Jong, in press; Van Joolingen, King, & De Jong, 1997). For the purpose of this
study, SimQuest has been extended with a modeling tool. In the simulation window, the learners can conduct experiments
on the system simulation by changing the values of the variables and starting the simulation. The simulation is dynamical,
so variable-values can also be changed during the simulation. In the modeling window the learners can construct their own
model. They can also run a simulation of their own model (a so called learner simulation) and thus compare the outcomes
of the simulations of the two different models. The learners task is to construct build a model that gives the same results as
the system model.

Figure 13 The collaborative learning environment with at the top the simulation window and at the bottom on the left side
the modeling window and on the right side the explanations. The domain of the simulation in this case is heat and energy.
                                     The language of the environment is Dutch.
In the modeling environment there were two different possible representations. These were chosen to be as far apart as
possible on the characteristics of (Löhner & Joolingen, 2001) in order to obtain a maximal contrast. In the following
paragraphs the two representations will be explained in more detail

Textual representation
In the textual representation (see Figure 14), the learners type in the relations using algebraic equations. There are two types
of equations, direct equations and rate equations. In a direct equation the learner specifies how a variable can be computed
from others, for instance: "force = mass*acceleration". Rate equations take the form: "delta(velocity) = acceleration",
where the delta indicates that the equation computes the change over time of the variable, not the variable itself. In essence,
a rate relation is a first-order differential equation. The equations are not statements in a computer program, like DMS
(Robson & Wong, 1985). Instead a simulation engine uses them to generate data and, for instance, takes care of the order in
which they are executed.

                           Figure 14 The textual modeling tool as present in the environment.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  466

In the textual representation learners can, in principle, create variables by typing in their names. However only variables
that are available in  the underlying  system simulation model  in the  learning environment      can be  made  visible in the
simulation interface. Here one of the consequences of the availability of a system simulation model becomes visible. The
model defines a set of variables for modeling. This is different for modeling tools designed for expressive modeling, but
inherent to the task at hand in which the model output needs to be compared with output from the simulation model.

Graphical representation
In the graphical representation (Figure 15), learners specify relations by drawing influence diagrams (inspired on Forbus
(1984)), consisting of nodes and directed arcs. Each node represents a variable; arcs between two variables mean that the
variable from which the arc is drawn influences the variable the arc points to. Influences are signed and exist in two flavors,
similar to the rate and direct equations in the textual representation. Rate relations indicate that the influence specifies the
change of the variable over time; direct relations indicate that value of the the variable itself is affected. The sign indicates
the direction of the influence. A positive sign means that if the source variable increases the (rate of change of the) target
variable also increases. A negative sign means the opposite, i.e. a decrease of a variable causes an increase of (the rate of
change of) another.

Figure 15 The graphical modeling tool with an example of a model. Rate relations are indicated in red, and point to a circle,
                                       indicating that the variable is a state variable.
To be able simulate the model in the graphical modeling tool and compare its output to the system simulation, the equations
of the system simulation are used to determine the exact equations used for simulating the graphical model the learner
creates.
As will be clear from the description, the graphical modeling language is qualitative. There is no precise specification of
relations in the sense that the learner creates a single computational prescription that can compute the value of one variable
from others. A feature of our graphical modeling tool, however, is that it can make non-local features of the model visible
in the topology of  the graph  the learner is drawing.  For instance, a feedback   loop,    an  important modeling construct
indicating that the change of a variable may be dependent on the size of the variable itself, is really visible as a loop in the
graphical diagram   as shown  in Figure 16.   The same   model  expressed  as text does     not emphasize  the feedback  loop
character. Here the loop has to be constructed by substituting one relation in another.

                                                      x
                                           -                  +

                                                                   delta(x) = -f
                                                                   f = k*x
                                        +          f

                                     k
   Figure 16 Difference in representation of a feedback loop, on the left in the graphical representation, on the right in the
textual representation. Both models represent the same model. The graphical representation emphasizes the loop character
                        of the model, the textual description focuses on the computational precision.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  467

EMPIRICAL STUDY
The experiment was designed to explore differences in communication and modeling processes, as well as differences in
the product of modeling, under influence of different modeling representations for explorative modeling. As the goal of the
modeling task is explorative modeling, pairs of learners are asked to recreate the model present in the system (system
model) by comparing it to a model they build themselves (learners model). Through building this model they are expected
to gain  a better understanding  of  the domain   being modeled      (temperature inside  a house). The learning  environment
requires the students to induce rules about the domain being modeled from the data in the system model simulation (system
simulation) and to come to an agreement about how to implement these rules in their learner model.

Method
41 secondary school students (grade 11) from three schools in the Amsterdam area participated in the experiment as part of
their regular coursework. The students also received fl. 30,- (± 12 USD) for participating. The experiment took a total time
of three hours.
First the students were tested for scientific reasoning skills with a test, adopted from the scientific reasoning part of the
ACT (ACT, 2001). This took about 20 minutes. Then the students were tested for relevant domain knowledge on energy
and heat (10 minutes). To get acquainted with the modeling environment each student individually worked through an
instruction manual on an example model of personal finance, 'the contents of your wallet', for approximately 45 minutes.
The students were randomly assigned to the two different modeling environments. After a short break the students were
then   divided  randomly  into pairs for the  final modeling     task. They spent  about  an hour   working  on a task on the
temperature of a house. For this task they were given only a minimal instruction, to give them as much freedom as possible.
During this task all actions in the learning environment were logged and also the students conversation was recorded.
Finally the students were again given a domain knowledge test (10 minutes).
As the goal of this study also was to gain understanding of the modeling process, the students collaborated in a face-to-face
setting. From a pilot study we learned that the communication between students was much more explicit when they worked
face-to-face, than when they worked in a CMC setting.
The quality of the models the pairs constructed during the final modeling task was determined using a method similar to the
one (Vollmeyer, Burns, & Holyoak, 1996) use (structure score). The score was obtained by adding the proportion of correct
relationships and the proportion of correct signs of the relationships. (There were 23 possible correct relationships.) The
score was then corrected by subtracting a penalty for redundant relationships. The score of the models could be in a range
from 0 to 2. In the text representation it would be possible to break down the correct specification of the relationships even
further (correct mathematical operation, correct weight), but to be able to compare the two representations we did not do
that.

Expectations
We expect effects of the representation on the communication of the pairs during the modeling, on the modeling process
and also on the product of the collaboration.
Because    the  graphical representation emphasizes   the structure    of the  model, we    expect students working with  that
representation to talk more about structural aspects of the model. For students working in the textual representation the
emphasis will be much more on the precise form of the relation. We also expect that there will be more discussion and
disagreement in the textual representation because it is less easy to just add a relation. In the text representation the students
will be much more inclined to reach an agreement about the relation they are about to add, whereas in the graphical
representation they can easily draw an arc and later delete it.
Therefore, one of our expectations about the collaborative modeling process is that there will be more experimenting with
the model (changing, adding and deleting relations) in the graphical representation. For the textual representation we expect
more experimenting with the simulations (learner as well as system) because the pairs need more data to reach the higher
precision of the relations that is necessary. We also expect the pairs working in the textual representation to take longer
before they actually start their first learner model simulation.
Finally for the product of the collaboration we expect better models in the graphical representation due to the better ability
to experiment with the model, but on the other hand we expect the pairs working in the textual representation to have a
better understanding of the found relationships.

RESULTS
Comparison of the two groups (graphical and textual) yielded no significant difference between the groups on the scientific
skills pretest. Also there  were  no  significant   difference   on grades  in math   and physics.  Therefore we  can  assume
equivalence of the two groups. The results of the domain test turned out to be unreliable. Also no differences were found
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page 468

between pre- and posttest on the domain for both groups, so the decision was made to discard the results of the domain
tests.
Analysis of the data logged during the modeling session shows that the pairs working in the graphical representation run
simulations  of  more  different models  (M=25.8,   SD=11.1)   than   those working   in the  textual representation  (M=16.4,
SD=14.4). This difference is significant at an alpha level of 0.05.
The pairs working in the graphical representation also constructed more complex models. In their first models on average
they used 6.1 (SD=3.7) relations, as compared to an average of 2.6 (SD=0.7) relations in the textual representation. The
final models in the graphical representation also consisted of more relationships (M=10.7, SD=4 compared to M=7.5,
SD=2.7 in the textual representation).
Not only were the models the pairs in the graphical representation constructed more complex, they also scored higher on
our  model   structure score (score   on  the last  model:   graphical  M=1.3,  SD=0.6     and textual  M=0.5,    SD=0.4).  All
aforementioned differences between the representations are significant at an alpha level of 0.05. We found no correlation
between the average score of the pairs on the scientific reasoning test and the model score of the last model.

                         Number of different       Number of relations      Number of relations     Model structure score
                           learner models           in the first model       in the last model        of the last model
           Textual           16.4 (14.4)                 2.6 (0.7)              7.5 (2.7)                  0.5 (0.4)
         Graphical           25.8 (11.1)                 6.1 (3.7)                10.7 (4)                 1.3 (0.6)
    Table 1 Overview of means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of some modeling process measures for the two
                                             representations (textual and graphical)
Although the number of simulations the pairs used was also higher in the graphical representation (see Table 2) the total
time   the pairs spent  running  both   the  system and   the learner  simulation  did   not significantly differ  between  the
representations. Thus the pairs working in the graphical representation use more, but shorter simulations. The average
number   of simulations  (both   system  and learner) per  model   was low  (M=2.7,   SD=0.6   graphical   and M=3.2,  SD=1.8
textual). This last difference is not significant. Also the time the pairs took before running their first self-made model was
not significantly different (graphical M=6.7 min, SD=4.2, textual M=3.7 min, SD=2.1).
                                                                                                         Number of
                        Number of            Total time         Number of            Total time          simulations
                         system          running system            learner        running learner        (system and
                       simulations           simulations        simulations          simulations         learner) per
                                                                                                        compiled model
       Textual          17.9 (11.7)       10,8 min (8,0)        21.7 (14.7)          7,3 min (3.5)         3.2 (1.8)
    Graphical           28.3 (12.6)         9.8 min (3.9)       39.0 (19.0)        10,8 min (4,1)          2.7 (0.6)
 Table 2 Overview of means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of measures for the use of the simulation during the
                           modeling process for the two representations (textual and graphical)

Influence of the representations on the communication
The two representations also give rise to different behavior of the collaborating pairs. In the graphical representations
relationships  can be  drawn very   easily, whereas   in the textual representation  the precise   form had to  be   determined.
Therefore in the graphical representation the focus of the conversation often jumps quickly from one relation to another.
A typical 'graphical' pair makes its relations on the basis of 'correlations' between the behaviors of variables. They look
what happens when they change a variable, and then add those relation(s) to their model. In the textual representation often
initially the same kind of reasoning is followed, but that is not enough for them to be able to add the relation to their model.
They have to go deeper into specifying their relations. Sometimes the textual pairs express the need to just quickly sketch a
relation. But also the graphical pairs are sometimes hindered by their representation, because it does not give them enough
insight in what is actually happening in the model.
The following protocol fragment gives an example of the type of reasoning of a pair of learners working with a graphical
modeling tool.
Students start a simulation of the system model (SimQuest model) and play around with the variables
A: OK, lets see. You see that P_total goes up, P_loss goes down.
B: Yes. P_total ... P_loss and T_inside.
A: Try what you can change here, in the SimQuest model. You can just ... with those sliders
A: No, not that one, not that one, not that ... That one. C_house. A_loss, A_loss?
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page 469

B: Sure
A: K_wall? K_wall?
B: That too
A: K_wall has a relation to k_total. K_wall up, k_total up.
B: When k_total goes up, P_total goes... where? Up.
A: And temperature? I mean temperature outside? Temperature outside, OK, errr temperature outside that...
B: Number of windows
A: {writes} number of windows
B: That has an effect on k_total.
A: Wait a minute, what does it have?
B: It has an effect on k_total.
A: {writes} K_total, yes
B: K_total has an effect on P_total
In this protocol fragment, the students are playing with the simulation and are noting what happens when they change the
value of an input variable on a purely phenomenological level. They do not actually think about the meaning of their
findings, they just look for correlations in the behavior of variables. They also jump very quickly from one relation to the
next. After this fragment, the students quickly add the relations they 'found' to their model. In the text representation this
type of modeling is impossible. In the following fragment the learners would like to be able to sketch their model, but are
hindered by their representation.
B: Let's start with P_heating, because ... if that is higher then ...
A: Huh? But that's not possible
B: {Asks researcher} So you write for instance ... if the heating is turned up, the temperature inside increases ... if it's low
        then the temperature decreases
R: Yes?
A: So how do I write that?
R: What exactly do you want to say? Because this is a textual modeling-tool. You have to be precise in what you want to
        say.
B: You can't say P_heating, the bigger ...
R: No, you have to look at what exactly is happening
If they had been working in the graphical representation, this would not have been a problem. They could have just drawn
the relation between the heating and the inside temperature, without having to think about an exact formulation. The
student's working with the textual representation thus often have to spend a lot of time thinking about the mathematics
behind the model, as can be seen in the following fragment.

A: So P_loss is...
B: Less
A: But what kind of relation is it? Isn't it a ehhh what's it called, exponential? Isn't it? That's this kind of formula, we have
        to make an exponential formula right?
B: Why don't we ...
A: Well, that's why I said exponential thing. He but that is right, isn't it? That you're closer to a value, so the formula... No
        it isn't exponential it's zero.
B: Then it has to stay
A: No, because then it's a what's it called
B: Asymmetrical
A: Then it's a valley, valley yes then it's an asymmetrical. It's not x squared. Then you would get a downwards parabola
right? That's not what it is.
But the graphical representation does present other problems. What the model is `exactly' doing is not always obvious from
the representation, as can be seen in the following fragment.
B: We probably should do more with the outside temperature. Cause look, if the temperature outside is higher, A_loss is
        also higher
A: Yes
B: Or errr lower. Should I put a minus?
A: Yes
Students add a relation between T_outside and A_loss to the model

...
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   470

A: A _loss is arealoss right? Squared meters
B: (unintelligible)
A: But what you're doing here, T_outside, that's in degrees Celsius, and you're subtracting it from squared meters.
What the students cannot see is that the negatively signed arrow they have drawn in their model does not represent a
subtraction, but a division. Some students even express their dissatisfaction with the 'easy' graphical representation.
B: (Looking at another group) Oh, it looks difficult with the text tool
A: Is it difficult in text? I don't think so. Then you can at least see what you're doing!

CONCLUSION & DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to explore the influences of different modeling representations on the communication process
between  collaborating    learners, the  explorative modeling    process  and  on   the results  of  the process. In   a   learning
environment  consisting   of  a simulation  window    and  a    modeling window,    learners   could  experiment  with   a system
simulation and try to build their own model of the domain (heat and energy). The two modeling representations used in the
study were chosen to make the expected differences as large as possible.
The data indicates that the representation has a strong influence on both the modeling process and its results. This is
apparent from the differences in activity and quality of the models. Activity is higher for the graphical group both for
modeling and experimenting with the simulation, as well as the scores indicating the quality of the resulting models. From
these results the graphical representation seems easier to use. The pairs made more complex models, which also scored
higher on  the quality   measure    we  defined. But  this representation  also allows     for a less deep  specification  of the
relationships. Therefore the question is whether the graphical representation really leads to better understanding of the
domain or if it just gives the students a better ability to try out possibly correct relations. The graphical representation
seems to invite more experimenting with the model (more changes), probably because the commitment to a learner model
relation is not as high as in the textual representation. In the textual representation the pairs have to spend so much time on
formulating a relation they deem correct, that they are probably much more reluctant to delete it. Nevertheless the relations
the pairs use in the graphical environment mostly seem very reasonable. They do not seem to be making their relations
randomly, just to see what will happen, but seem to base their relations on 'common sense' reasoning.
The results on the use of the simulation in the two representations were not in line with our expectations. We expected the
pairs working in the textual representation to use the simulation more than those in the graphical representation, and also
we expected a higher overall use of the simulation. A reason for this minimal use of the simulation could be that the
students are not used to using experimental data in such a way. Also the difficulty of the textual representation might have
been a problem.
In the analysis of the communication of the pairs we have also seen the great influence the representations have on the
communication. The different representations seem to support to different phases in the modeling process. The graphical
representation leads the students too switching quickly from one relation to the next, and trying out every idea that seems to
come up. This seems like a viable strategy for the beginning of a modeling process, when the learners do not yet have a
clear idea about    the model they   are making.  In the   text representation this kind   of  modeling  is virtually impossible.
Learners have to actually think a relationship through before they can implement it. This seems like a preferable strategy
for the latter part of the modeling process, when the model is brought into its definite form. Both forms of representation
investigated in this study have their own particular role in the modeling process.
Therefore in realistic settings learners should use a mixed representation that providing the benefits of both the expression
power of the textual representation and the easy experimenting of the graphical representation. But that alone is not enough.
The modeling process has to be regulated by either the system or the learner, to make sure the representations are used for
the right purposes and to help overcome problems that can be introduced by using MER's.
In our future research we plan on combining the representations, and manipulating the amount and form of the regulation of
the modeling process.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research project is funded by the Dutch research organization NWO under grant number 411.21.115

REFERENCES
ACT, I. (2001). ACT Assessment Homepage. Available: http://www.act.org/aap/index.html.
Ainsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers and Education, 33, 131-152.
Doerr, H. M. (1995). An Integrated Approach to Mathematical Modeling: A Classroom Study. Paper presented at the
        Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA, April 18-22.
Forbus, K. D. (1984). Qualitative process theory. Artificial Intelligence(24), 85-168.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page 471

Hestenes, D. (1987). Towards a modeling theory of physics instruction. American Journal of Physics, 55(5), 440-454.
Jackson, S. L., Stratford, S. J., Krajcik, J. S., & Soloway, E. (1996). Making Dynamic Modeling Accessible to Pre-College
       Science Students. Interactive Learning Environments, 4(3), 233-257.
Joolingen, W. R. van, & Jong, T. de (in press). SimQuest, authoring educational simulations. In T. Murray & S. Blessing &
       S. Ainsworth (Eds.), Submitted to: Authoring Tools for Advanced Technology Learning Environments: Toward
       cost-effective adaptive, interactive, and intelligent educational software. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Joolingen, W. R. van, King, S., & Jong, T. de (1997). The SimQuest authoring system for simulation-based discovery
       environments. In B. d. Boulay & R. Mizoguchi (Eds.), Knowledge and media in learning systems (pp. 79-87).
       Amsterdam: IOS.
Löhner, S., & Joolingen, W. R. van (2001). Representations for model construction in collaborative inquiry environments.
       Paper presented at the First European Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (Euro CSCL),
       Maastricht, The Netherlands, March 22-24.
Mandinach, E. B. (1988). The Cognitive Effects of Simulation-Modeling Software and Systems Thinking on Learning and
       Achievement. Paper presented at the Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association, New
       Orleans April 5-9.
Robson, K., & Wong, D. (1985). Teaching and Learning with the Dynamical Modelling System. School Science Review,
       66(237), 682-695.
Suthers, D. D. (1999). Effects of Alternate Representations of Evidential Relations on Collaborative Learning Discourse.
       Paper presented at the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL) conference, Stanford University,
       Palo Alto, CA, Dec. 12 - 15.
Vollmeyer, R., Burns, B. D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). The Impact of Goal Secificity on Strategy Use and the Acquisition
       of Problem Structure. Cognitive Science, 20, 75-100.
Zhang, J. (1997). The Nature of External Representations in Problem Solving. Cognitive Science, 21(2), 179-217.
