Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 491

             A. ISSUES IN THE DESIGN OF CSCL SYSTEMS

   Symphony-Q: A Support System for Learning Music
                                  through Collaboration
                                                Fusako Kusunoki
                                                Tama Art University
                                             kusunoki@tamabi.ac.jp
                                                Masanori Sugimoto
                                                University of Tokyo
                                             sugi@r.dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                                             Hiromichi Hashizume
                                         National Institute of Informatics
                                                  has@nii.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
This paper describes the Symphony-Q support system for learning music. This system integrates a sensing board and a
computer, and is used for collaborative learning in a face-to-face setting. One of the aims of Symphony-Q is to enhance
music experiences: children who do not have music skills can easily participate in music learning, enjoy making sounds,
and play rhythmically to music in collaboration with others. The paper discusses comments and feedback from school
children and their teachers, which were collected during experiments with Symphony-Q carried out in a Japanese public
elementary school.

Keywords
Music learning, music experience, collaborative learning, interaction, , sensing board, elementary school

INTRODUCTION
This paper describes a support system for learning music through collaboration. Several studies have indicated that it is
very important for individuals to have rich music experiences, especially in their infancy, in order to fully develop their
capability for music (Gordon, 1997).The system proposed in this paper, Symphony-Q, aims at enriching learners' musical
experiences and developing their musical capabilities through the learning of tones, rhythms, and chords in an easy manner.
Symphony-Q uses a sensing board that was developed by the authors. This board was applied to a support system for
learning about environmental problems (Kusunoki, 1999), and electronically-enhanced board games. In Symphony-Q, a
personal computer and the sensing board are linked together, and animations generated by the computer are projected onto
the surface of the board through an LCD projector. When a learner places physical pieces on the board, the system makes
different sounds based on their location, and changes the animations.
The features of Symphony-Q can be summarized as follows:
·   CSCL for music: a group of learners sits around the sensing board of Symphony-Q, and uses it in a face-to-face
    situation. They can learn about tones, rhythms and chords through their interactions and communication, and enhance
    their own music experiences.
·   Raising learners' motivations with games: learners with Symphony-Q can start learning music, as they would play a
    game, which is an effective way to motivate children to learn.
·   Augmented   reality: by integrating sounds, animations and     a  physical board,  Symphony-Q    creates   an  immersive
    learning environment.   The system  also supports learners who     have difficulty using    traditional input devices for
    computers (a mouse and a keyboard), or musical instruments. It enables learners to participate in music learning
    situations by directly and intuitively manipulating physical objects in the real world.

SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
Symphony-Q is composed of a sensing board, a personal computer, an LCD projector, a MIDI sound device, and audio
speakers. The sensing board and the computer, and the computer and the MIDI sound device are connected through their
serial interfaces. An animation of a musical instrument (for example, a piano keyboard) is projected onto the surface of the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 492

board. When a physical piece is placed on a certain area of the instrument (for example, one of its keys), the corresponding
sound is immediately emitted through the speakers.
One, two or three persons can use Symphony-Q. When it is used by a group of learners, Symphony-Q generates animations
and sounds of multiple instruments at the same time. Each learner can select his or her favorite instrument and participate in
an ensemble.

                                        Figure 1. Example   of  using   sensing   board
The system changes animations based on learners' inputs. For example, if the pieces are placed correctly, a character on the
board smiles and guides learners to the next question. If the pieces are not placed correctly, the character looks sad and
prompts learners to try again. The background image of the animations also changes in relation to learners' scores from a
pleasant atmosphere, for satisfactory performance, to a sad atmosphere for unsatisfactory performance, in order to raise
learners' motivation and engagement.

CLASSROOM EXPERIMENTS
The experiments and evaluation of Symphony-Q were carried out in a Japanese public elementary school (in Yokohama,
Kanagawa prefecture) from February to June 2001. The teacher in charge of the class and a music teacher were asked to use
the system in their music lessons. Thirty school children (15 boys and 15 girls) in a fifth grade class participated in the
experiments. The school children were randomly divided into 10 groups of three. After using the system, the children and
their teachers freely discussed   their experiences. All of the experiments    and  discussions were recorded by   two video
cameras. Post-experiment interviews were also carried out, and information by means of questionnaires was collected.

DISCUSSION
The   system supported   learners who    were not  skilled at manipulating   conventional computers   in school  lessons. By
supporting the intuitive manipulation of pieces and making the computer invisible, the system encouraged children to play
and learn music. Many music learning support systems use traditional graphical user interfaces (GUIs) and input devices
(Willams, 1998). Compared with these systems, Symphony-Q's learning environment has the potential to enhance learners'
communication   skills, interactions, and  level of  participation.  Further experiments  with  Symphony-Q   are required  to
address the finding that animations may disturb children's learning. In addition, it is not clear whether children can truly
acquire musical knowledge and skills as a result of their interaction with the system. Another issue is related to the game
feature of our system. Playing a game may direct learners to focus on the superficial aspects of the system, such as
animations or characters, rather than on learning musical concepts, such as chords or rhythms. Achieving a balance between
the game aspect and the learning of music are interesting and challenging problems that require investigation in the future.

REFERENCES
Gordon, E. (1997) A Music Learning Theory for Newborn and Young Children. GIA Publication Inc, Chicago, IL.
Kusunoki,  F., Sugimoto,   M.,  and     Hashizume,  H. (1999)  A    System   for Supporting Group   Learning  that Enhances
         Interactions. Proceedings of CSCL'99 (Stanford, CA, December 1999) 323-327.
Williams, D. and Webster, P. (1999) Experiencing Music Technology (2nd Edition). Schirmer Books, New York, NY.
