Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page  493

            COALE: Collaborative and Adaptive Learning
                                               Environment
           Nobuko Furugori 1, Hirotaka Sato 1, Hiroaki Ogata 2, Youji Ochi 2, Yoneo Yano 2
                                   1 Systems Research Section, INES Corp.
            2 Department of Information Science and Intelligent Systems, Tokushima University
              {furugori,sato_hiro}@ines.co.jp 1, {ogata,ochi,yano}@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp 2
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a new adaptive WBT (Web Based Training) environment for collaborative learning named COALE
(Collaborative and Adaptive Learning Environment). COALE is an integrated environment of collaborative learning into
individual  learning based on WBT    with active personalized    awareness    provider. We  propose  a  personalized active
recommendation  system,    which gives proper  awareness    at proper  timing for  each learner to support dynamic   course
organization aimed at effective and efficient learning.

Keywords
Collaborative learning, personalization, recommendation, awareness.

INTRODUCTION
This paper proposes a WBT (Web Based Training) system with active personalized awareness provider, named COALE
(Collaborative Adaptive Learning Environment), to support dynamic course organization aimed at effective and efficient
learning. COALE is based on the learner-centered concept. So the learners take the initiative of their own process of
learning with proper supports from the environment, instead of given the next step from the system automatically through
the intention of an author of the course. COALE has two keywords in its name: adaptive and collaborative. Adaptive
features are realized by personalization. COALE supports learners' to select the next step learning material by personalized
recommendation. The next step material selections settle the main road of the Course, step by step. COALE provides
collaborative learning support to learners': to post shared knowledge and to discuss with co-learners. Note that we consider
the posted shared knowledge as a part of the learning materials. Discussions and advices works to spread and deepen the
learners' knowledge, therefore collaboration is considered to spread the width of the main road or to form branch roads of
the Course.

COALE
Personalization is popular technique of web customization or e-commerce where user interface or contents recommendation
is personalized according to the users' former activities (Hirsh, 2000). The major difference between such systems and
COALE is the filtering criteria for the recommendation. The way of presentation of awareness information called the
intervention type (Jermann, 2001) is "graphical visualization" and the level is monitoring among the three levels: mirroring,
monitoring, and advising. This approach is similar to SharlokII (Ogata, 2000).
User Interface
Fig. 1 shows a display snapshot of the COALE prototype system.
Main Window (A): The right side window is the main place for individual learning action. A learner read and solves an
exercise question, put an answer. The system checks the answer whether it is correct or not. By pushing the "explanation
request" button, the system shows the explanation of the answer. Pushing the "show shared knowledge" button, the system
presents a list of the shared knowledge for learners' selection. To put a shared knowledge, push the "knowledge input"
button then an window for input will be opened. As for collaborative learning action, "request discussion" button works to
open a chat request window for the first step of opening a discussion.
Contents Awareness Map (B): To select the next step exercise, learners select one of the recommended contents from the
Contents Awareness Map. On the Map, a square mark represents a category, a circle represents an exercise question, which
has not been correctly answered, and a diamond represents a question, which has not been learned. The level of difficulty of
a question is reflected on their color. The orders of recommendation are displayed as a number at a side of the question title.
The questions, which are graded as first and second, are presented in red text and given the order number. Learners can
select a circle or a diamond to open the corresponding exercise question.

Learning-mate  Awareness   Map(C):  To  select a proper    partner of  discussion, learners can consult the Learning-mate
Awareness Map. The nodes represent co-learners, exercise questions, and categories of questions. Corresponding marks are
circle, diamond and square. Firstly and secondly recommended learners are in yellow color, presented with the order
   Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   494

   number. Moreover, up to two contents for these two recommended learners are displayed as their background knowledge.
   From third to seventh recommended learners are shown in gray circle.

                                                                                             Main Window

                     
          Learning-mate Awareness Map
                                                                           /E

                         Learning-mate                                                                Category
Category

 Exercise Question
                       Background Knowledge                      Show Shared Knowledge Button
                                                               Knowledge Input Button               Exercise Question

               Contents Awareness Map                      Request Discussion Button

                                                                                                       Answer

                Category                                                              Explanation Request Button

                         Exercise Question

                                                 Fig. 1. Screen snapshot of COALE.

   CONCLUDING REMARKS
   This paper proposed two kinds of personalized active awareness provider. One recommends learning contents for the next
   step and the other recommends learning-mate for discussion. Both of them are presented as a visualized map using GUI,
   according to the history and the current state of learners' behavior. Because COALE follows the learner-centered concept,
   the   final decision  of selection is left to the learners. This work was supported   in cooperation  with    the Information
   Technology Consortium, as a part of a project of the Information-technology Promotion Agency Japan.

   REFERENCES
   Hirsh, H., Basu, C., and Davison, B. D. (2000) Learning to Personalize. CACM, 43, 8, 102-106.
   Jermann,    P., Soller,  A., and Muehlenbrock,    M. (2001)   From  Mirroring to   Guiding: A  Review of    State  of the Art
               Technology for Supporting Collaborative Learning. Euro-CSCL 2001, 324-331.
   Ogata, H., Matsuura, K., and Yano, Y. (2000) Active Knowledge Awareness Map: Visualizing Learners Activities in a
               Web  Based   CSCL    Environment.   Proceedings   of The  International  Workshop   on New      Technologies  for
               Collaborative Learning (NTCL) 2000, 89-98.
