Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 497

    Using the Internet to Improve University Education:
    Problem-oriented Web-based Learning with MUNICS
                                  Frank Fischer, Pamela Troendle, Heinz Mandl
                             University of Munich, Institute of Educational Psychology
                                            Leopoldstr. 13, D - 80802 Munich
                                              fischerf@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de
ABSTRACT
A principled   approach  to  the  design of problem-oriented, web-based    learning at  the  university level is presented.  The
principles include providing authentic contexts with multimedia, supporting collaborative knowledge construction, making
thinking visible with dynamic visualisation, quick access to content resources via ICT, and flexible support by tele-tutoring.
These principles are used in the MUNICS learning environment, which is designed to help students of computer science to
apply their conceptual knowledge from the lectures to complex real-world problems. For example, students may model the
information   flow in an  educational    organization with a  dynamic  visualisation   tool. A main   finding in  the  formative
evaluation study with the prototype is the ignorance of the students concerning the additional content resources. This
finding is discussed on the background of the well-known phenomenon of insufficient use of help systems in software
applications.

Keywords
collaborative knowledge construction, dynamic visualization, problem-oriented learning, tele-tutoring, university education,
web-based learning

PRINCIPLES FOR PROBLEM-ORIENTED, WEB-BASED LEARNING AND THEIR USE IN
THE DESIGN OF MUNICS
In problem-oriented environments, (1) authentic problem contexts are seen as the starting points of learning processes.
MUNICS(*)is based around an authentic multimedia case. As the content area is "distributed work groups", the case is
about the inefficient distribution of information within an organisation. This case study represents a typical class of pro-
blems in computer science and a real-life scenario. The students are encouraged to actively request the information they
need. Ideally, (2) learners engage in collaborative knowledge construction when dealing with these problems, discuss
different perspectives and share their prior knowledge. In MUNICS, learners collaborate in small groups (three to five
students). MUNICS     offers  multiple   communication  tools including  a chat   tool for synchronous   communication     and  a
shared document repository to facilitate co-operative document management. (3) Making thinking visible with dynamic
visualisation. Especially when    dealing   with  complex  problems, visualization  may    enhance the  construction   of mental
models of   the topic and    lead to deeper  understanding.  MUNICS      includes the  Modeler   Tool   (Koch et  al., 2001) for
collaborative dynamic visualization over the web. The tool enables modelling, analysis of static as well as dynamic aspects,
and simulation of the flow of information. (4) Quick access to content resources via ICT. In problem-oriented learning,
increasingly self-directed exploration of the problem and the task domain is emphasised (Gräsel, Fischer, & Mandl, 2001).
MUNICS provides background knowledge like the hypermedia material of two lectures on the topic under consideration.
For both lectures, lecture notes in HTML are available online. (5) Providing flexible support by tele-tutoring. Apart from
content resources - a human tutor or an expert is available. Students can use the chat tool in the MUNICS environment to
get in touch with the tutor.

Goals of the formative evaluation study
We implemented a prototype of MUNICS and conducted a formative evaluation study. The primary goal was to assess the
extent to which the principles were realized in the prototype and what modification of MUNICS could improve objective
and subjective learning processes and outcomes.

METHOD
(1) Sample. Eleven computer science students from the Technical University of Munich volunteered to test the learning
environment. The participants were separated into learning groups of two or three students. (2) Data sources, variables,
and instruments:   As instruments    to  evaluate the realization of the principles we   used  (a) observation   protocol,  (b) a
knowledge Test, (c) a personal data questionnaire; (d) a questionnaire concerning acceptance, (e) interaction protocols from
the communication tools; (f) an individual work report and (g) a face-to-face group discussion at the end of each session.
(3) Procedure. The session started with a short introduction about the purpose of the study and its course. Then students
were asked to complete the questionnaire on personal data, followed by the prior knowledge test. After an introduction into
the functionality of MUNICS, the students started to work on the problem. The learning group members were located in
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  498

different rooms, each equipped with a computer. After collaboration (approx. 2 hours), the learners were asked to complete
the work report, the knowledge test, and the questionnaire on acceptance. Finally, members of the learning group discussed
their experiences face-to-face.

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
(1) Providing authentic contexts for learning. The observation protocols revealed that all participants used and explored the
Interactive  Problem  Context   intensely ­  this part of   the work  occupied   about half of  the  overall working   time. This
observation is in line with the subjective evaluation of the learners. (2) Supporting collaborative knowledge construction.
Questionnaire data indicated, that students accepted learning in small groups to a high degree. However, they rated the
quality of collaboration for their own learning group as relatively low. The analysis of the interaction protocols revealed
that the central focus of students' discourse was about coordination of. Conclusion: Scripted co-operation might structure
learners' collaborative activities more   appropriately.  A  main  question  is, how   detailed such  a script should  guide  the
interaction. More   controlled  research  on this issue  is  needed. (3) Making   thinking  visible  with dynamic   visualisation.
Participants used the Modeler Tool collaboratively. Nevertheless, they evaluated the functionality and the usability of the
tool to be still in need of improvement. The group discussion revealed that students felt restricted by the tool. On the other
hand, the group discussions also showed that the dynamic representation was seen as very helpful for deeper understanding.
Conclusions:   This can   be seen   as the   more    general problem   of finding  the  right  specification  level in designing
representation tools. Domain-specific structures might facilitate collaboration by providing a kind of initial common ground
(Fischer et al., in press). However, a highly specified structure might force more advanced students to change strategy.
There is  hardly any    research on  the  interaction  between   the degrees  of  freedom   of  a representation tool  and   prior
knowledge.   (4) Quick   access  to knowledge     resources.    Most of  the students  hardly   ever used  the resources  at  all.
Conclusions: At first glance, the phenomenon might be attributable to bad design of the online lecture notes. However, we
argue that the problem points to a more general issue. Studies in different domains and with different tasks showed that
students refrain from using background knowledge, glossary or help information, even when experiencing knowledge gaps
(Gräsel et al., 2001). More basic research on this topic is needed which can shed light on psychological mechanisms
responsible for this effect. (5) Providing flexible support by tele-tutoring. The facility of consulting the tutor was frequently
used. Students emphasised the importance of the tutor. Moreover, they were satisfied with the support they received.
Conclusions: The effect of an expert or tutor participating in peer collaboration is a neglected area of research. On the one
hand, this might be detrimental to intensive and high-level negotiation processes, because there is someone who knows the
right answer (so why have an argument?). On the other hand, a tutor can introduce the relevant topics, reducing the risk of
collaborative construction of misconceptions and thematic vagabonding.

REFERENCES
Fischer, F., Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., & Mandl, H. (in press). Fostering collaborative knowledge construction with visualization
          tools. Learning and Instruction.
Gräsel, C., Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2001). The use of additional information in problem-oriented learning environments.
          Learning Environments Research, 3, 287-305.
Koch, J. H., Schlichter, J., & Tröndle, P. (2001). Munics: Modeling the Flow of Information in Organizations. In P.
          Dillenbourg   &  A.    Eurelings   (Eds.),  euro   CSCL    2001    European  Perspectives    on    Computer-Supported
          Collaborative Learning . Maastricht, NL: University Maastricht.
