Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  501

              Different Achievement in Online Oral History
                                        Jason B. Ellis, Amy S. Bruckman
                                           Georgia Institute of Technology
                                             {jellis, asb}@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
The Internet has made it possible to incorporate adult mentors in the classroom in ways that it would have been difficult or
impossible to do previously. As we move forward with such projects, it is important for us to consider what these adults
contribute to the learning process. Palaver Tree Online is an online community that supports kids interviewing elders to
build up a shared database of oral history. In this paper, we give a brief overview of two case studies of kids in Palaver
Tree. In addition, we propose a new role for adults in aiding students having difficulty.
Keywords
Online community, oral history, children, adults, elders
INTRODUCTION
Projects like Foxfire   (Wigginton   1985) have  shown       that oral  history can provide opportunities for deep learning by
connecting students with real people who have stories to tell. It is our hypothesis that students can gain a new perspective
on history through these kinds of interviews with elders. Certainly, many elders have life stories to share. However what
specifically students take away from such discussions with elders is unclear.
Palaver Tree Online is a constructionist (Papert 1991) online community aimed at exploring this issue. In Palaver Tree
Online, kids interview elders and use what they learned to create online artifacts that share the stories with the world.
Through two brief case studies, this paper contrasts the experiences of two groups of students in Palaver Tree Online during
its use in a middle school classroom during the 2000-2001 school year. We give a brief overview of a more successful case
followed by a less successful one and suggest a new role for elders in scaffolding the teacher in helping less productive
students improve their work.
PALAVER TREE ONLINE
A Palaver tree is a West African tree that serves as the center of a village. It is a place where elders come to share their life
stories and a place where the community comes to listen. Our aim is to create an online space that honors this tradition ­ a
place where kids can hear history from primary sources.
The design of Palaver Tree Online (PTO) is based on three years of work in classrooms doing e-mail oral history (Ellis,
Bruckman et al. 1999). One of the most important lessons we learned in this early work is that we are scaffolding a
complex social process that involves students, teachers, and elders. Teachers need a way to recruit elders to work with their
classes and manage their students online. We need to provide a comfortable place for elders to share their stories and other
personal information online. Finally, we need to support kids taking the stories they hear from elders and creating online
artifacts based on them. We call these artifacts PalaverStories.
We used the lessons learned from our e-mail studies to design PTO ­ a client interface and server infrastructure that aims to
help the process of online oral history go more smoothly for all involved. The software helps carry through our interaction
model and supports the roles of kids, teachers, and elders (Ellis and Bruckman 2001).
CASE STUDY OVERVIEW
We studied the use of Palaver Tree Online in one 8th grade Georgia History class over the course of six weeks. There were
21 students in the class and they worked in groups of two, with one group of one. Students visited the computer lab once or
twice per week   during   the study. Each  visit lasted one       hour. We  did  extensive classroom observation, pre and post
interviews with the kids and teacher, a student focus group, and student and elder surveys. We did post interviews with
several elders as well.
Before getting started with PTO, students were assigned to read the Civil Rights chapter in their Georgia history textbook.
They then spent a day in class brainstorming questions for elders. The first day in the lab, students reviewed discussions
and PalaverStories from prior classes. The second day, each group of students was assigned an elder to interview, read the
elder's profile, and posted initial questions for the elder.
Interviews consisted of a question and answer session between one elder and a group of kids over the course of two weeks
(four sessions). After this, kids began work on their PalaverStories while many continued their discussions with elders for
an additional two weeks (four sessions). Finally, each group made their projects available for feedback from elders and
other kids. Feedback occurs in an anchored discussion (Guzdial 1997) that has the group's project as its focus. Kids spent
the next two sessions giving each other feedback and reading the feedback they received from elders. A few groups made
revisions to their PalaverStories based on elder feedback.
Our recent work has examined two groups of kids using PTO in detail: a more successful case and a less successful case.
As there is not room here to give specifics on the cases, we will discuss them at a high level. In Case 1, students asked
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page 502

questions based on the elder's profile, heard stories about the elder's life, and created a PalaverStory that captured what
they learned in a narrative that showed synthesis. In Case 2, students started in the same way but were never able to focus
their interview questions to the same degree as the students in Case 1. The kids' follow-up questions showed little reflection
on the elder's previous responses and the discussion got into little depth on Civil Rights. Just as they got further and further
away from the subject matter at hand in their interview discussion, the PalaverStory created by these kids starts out well but
gets confused and off-topic later.
Mid-way through project in Case 2, the teacher's intervention was needed. Due to the volume of messages, however, the
teacher was unable to review the discussions at the level of detail required to detect these breakdowns on a regular basis.
On the other hand, the elder simply tried to answer student questions to the best of his ability and may perhaps have felt that
offering direction to the students would have been overstepping his bounds. How, then, do we aid teachers and elders in
detecting and assisting students that are having difficulty?
Although there are numerous interviews going on, each of these is home to one elder. Perhaps, then, there is a role for the
elder in identifying problematic discourses and alerting the teacher ­ a role similar to the One Sky, Many Voices staff
members that monitor discussions (Lee and Songer 1999). Once an elder detects a problem, we could provide a mechanism
for that elder to indicate the specific place in Palaver Tree that the teacher might want to pay special attention to. This
would prompt the teacher to review the discussion and decide what (if any) intervention is necessary. Of course, for this
scenario to work, elders must be keenly aware of what the students need to be doing in order to succeed, as O'Neill found
in the CoVis Mentor Database (O'Neill, Abeygunawardena et al. 2000).
CONCLUSION
The Internet has made it possible to incorporate adults in the classroom in ways that it would have been difficult or
impossible to do previously. As we move forward with such projects, it is important for us to consider what these adults
contribute to the learning process and how we might scaffold this process. Here, we have briefly presented two case studies
of students and adults working together online and described a new role for elders in the learning process. By connecting
kids with adults eager to share their knowledge and encouraging students to explore interests in an appropriate framework,
we believe educators can create important new learning experiences. For more detail on this work, see the project website at
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/elc/palaver/
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the teachers, kids and elders that have participated in this and previous studies of Palaver Tree Online. Generous
financial support for this work is provided by Intel and IBM.
REFERENCES
Ellis, J. B. and A. S. Bruckman (2001). Designing Palaver Tree Online: Supporting Social Roles in a Community of Oral History.
        Proceedings of Computer-Human Interaction 2001. Seattle, WA: 474-481.
Ellis, J. B., A. S. Bruckman, et al. (1999). Children and Elders Sharing Stories: Lessons from Two Online Oral History Projects.
        Proceedings of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 1999. Stanford, CA: 151-158.
Guzdial, M. (1997). Information ecology of collaborations in educational settings: Influence of tool. Proceedings of CSCL 97. Toronto,
        Ontario, Canada: 83-90.
Lee, S.-Y. and N. B. Songer (1999). How Does Electronic Discourse Support Students' Scientific Inquiry In An Internet-Enhanced
        Collaborative Learning Environment? Annual Meeting of the AERA. Montreal, Canada.
O'Neill, D. K., H. Abeygunawardena, et al. (2000). The Telementor's Guidebook: A field manual for supporting inquire on-line, Ontario
        Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto: 61.
Papert, S. (1991). Situating Constructionism. Constructionism. I. Harel and S. Papert. Norwood, NJ, Ablex Publishing.
Wigginton, E. (1985). Sometimes a Shining Moment: The Foxfire Experience. Garden City, NY, Anchor Books.
