Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page  503

               Design of Augmented Creative Environments
                                     Colin Beardon, Pelle Ehn, Lone Malmborg
                                 Arts and Communication, Malmö University, Sweden
                     su1620@eclipse.co.uk pelle.ehn@k3.mah.se lone.malmborg@k3.mah.se
ABSTRACT
In this short paper we present the conceptual framework underlying research projects in a newly established research studio
concerned   with  the  design    of technology-augmented      creative   environments.  The     studio investigates  design-oriented
collaborative environments for inspirational learning with demands on discovery and creative spaces. This is integrated
with inquiries into artistic performance as creative practices. We have a collaborative learning research approach and
emphasize the importance of place and body (synkinaesthetics) in collaborative learning. Important contexts are performing
arts as creative practices and inspirational learning in design education.

Keywords
Creative practices, design education, inspirational learning, synkinaesthetics, performing arts

DESIGN OF LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
Arts and Communication at Malmö University organizes research in cross-disciplinary design-oriented studios. A recently
initiated research studio is concerned with the design of technology-augmented creative environments. We investigate the
design of   environments     for  learning, understood     as places   for collaborative   creative  activities,  by  addressing  the
fundamental intrinsic interplay between interactive media technologies, space (including architecture) and creative practices
in design and the arts (especially, theatre and performance). The research work has a special focus on physical spaces and
leading-edge technologies for rich multi-user multi-site interaction and ubiquitous computing, as opposed to the more
traditional focus on individual personal-computer based learning.

Time, place and cooperation
New conceptions of learning can be summarized in three important concepts for future research which relate to the design
of learning environments: Time: Learning takes place over a long period in life. It is a process of knowledge construction,
which itself is knowledge-dependent; people use their existing knowledge to construct new knowledge. Place: Learning
takes  place  in a   variety of  environments.   Learning     design  has  to take into  account    distributed  cognition   requiring
knowledge    in  the head  to be  combined   with  knowledge     in  the  world.  Cooperation:   Learning    is part of collaborative
processes in   professional   and   educational  settings. Education   is  incorporated as  part  of   collaborative  work   activities
fostering growth and exploration. These trends in learning research are supported by Resnick (1989), Norman (1993), and
in learning  theory   by  Lave   and  Wenger,    (1991),   Fischer  (1996).   A  'paradigm  change'    is on its way    with learning
environment, which will influence our whole everyday environment. Where the CSCW field mainly has been based on an
integration  of  sociological and   computer    science perspectives,    research on  creative  environments     for learning should
broaden the perspective to also encompass concepts, ideas and methods from design, architecture, cognitive science and the
creative arts by strengthening the importance of space and of designing interactive systems which allow for the use of more
senses. An important aspect of learning relates to the coupling of mind and body. Learning a process taking place in a
community of practice; a creative activity supported by close interaction between senses and mind. We should design for
synkinaesthetic interaction (Kirkeby and Malmborg 1995). Using a kinaesthetic approach to interaction design is also
suggested   by  Svanæs    (1997)  as  a way   to design    interaction with   our  physical environment.     Svanæs   uses   the term
`kinaesthetic   thinking' to  signify direct cognitive     operations  on  tactile-kinaesthetic sense  experiences.   Synkinesthetic
interaction is to a large extent `tacit' in the sense that it is not simply the manipulation of symbolic representations. Creation
and expression of meaning is embedded in body movements.

Performing arts ­ the study of `creative practices'
The study of how to design environments that support creativity benefits from the study of creative practices, or what
people actually do when they behave in a manner that we generally agree is creative. Some of the clearest domains in which
to study this are the creative arts, the crafts and theatre. This does not mean that we are only interested in developing
environments to support this kind of creative work, but rather that we expect to find practices that have been devised in
order to maximize creative potential. We hope to be able to learn from these practices, and to generalize from them in order
to enhance creative practice in other human endeavours. We avoid the term `creativity', concentrating instead upon specific
practices: creative practice being seen as a mode of human interaction with the world. While technical practice adopts
values such   as formalism,   information,   logical reasoning,    precision, detail, correctness and     completeness,  by  contrast,
creative practice tends towards communication, visual, spatial, textural and aural representations, ambiguity, abstraction,
intuition and imagination. What is significant, is that the term `creative' is here not simply applied to a particular individual,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  504

profession or occupation, but can be applied to any human endeavour. The co-existence of these two modes of interaction
within the same project is problematic because of the different value systems they espouse. Our aim is to facilitate this co-
existence in a constructive way. We aim to explore these issues of mediated communication through theatre performances
that are both valid in their own creative terms, and explore key issues of representation and communication with respect to
contemporary digital technologies. Through a series of performances we hope to produce interesting theatre that appeals to
a theatre audience as well as raising and clarifying issues about communication within design. We think it may increase our
understanding of technologically mediated communication and of spatial metaphors. But perhaps most significantly for this
audience, it may lead to the idea of `boundary practices' and their role in brokering design activities in communities where
different stakeholders have not just different languages, but different value systems

Design education ­ the study of inspirational learning
We are interested in the design of technology-augmented environments for "inspirational learning" as it takes place in
environments    like the design  studio or  the master   class in architecture, design  and  art. The inspirational learning
environments that we envision are dedicated physical places where people in collaboration can establish and explore a
particular  thematic   learning  space   by  activating,  manipulating,   combining     and  assembling  configurations  of
representational objects of mixed media origin. In such environments learning is stimulated by the presence of inspirational
resources  ­ images,   music, film, samples  of  materials,   everyday objects, which   provide an  element of surprise and
discovery and help see things differently. An inspirational learning environment allows for novel forms of interactivity,
such as: imprecise, fluid forms of categorizing inspirational material; digitally augmented physical `things-to-think-with';
building  one's own   collection of material across digital   media and  physical  objects; creating exhibitions of relevant
materials within a project-specific environment, making one's learning experiences visible and sharing them with co-
present and distant others. Especially we have found inspiration for this approach in the Wunderkammer concept (Büscher
et al 1999), (Lainer and Wagner 2000). This is also the background for our ATELIER project (architecture and technology
for inspirational learning environments). While many projects focus on distance learning, the ATELIER project starts out
from face-to-face interactions with people and material artefacts in physical places and asks how we should enhance such
environments to turn it into a resource for inspiration and creative learning. Inspirational learning and technologies will be
explored at two sites: A "traditional" master-class in architecture, which is contrasted by the setting of an interaction design
graduate program studio. While architects' work space is rich with multi-medial materials and artefacts, much of the
interaction designers' work environment is concentrated in the screen, but at the same time more collaborative and open to
exploring the possibilities of facilitating sharing and interactivity across temporal and spatial boundaries. The project will
proceed through a combination of proactive ethnographic fieldwork and participatory design.

REFERENCES
Büscher, M, Kompast, M, Lainer, R, Wagner, I (1999). The Architect's Wunderkammer: Aesthetic Pleasure & Engagement
         in Electronic Spaces, Digital Creativity 10,1, 1-17.
Fischer, G. (1996) Learning & Intelligent Systems. NSF Symposium (June 26th 1996).
Kirkeby, O. F., and Malmborg, L. (1996) Imaginization as an approach to interactive multimedia. In: B. Gorayska (ed.)
         Cognitive Technology. North Holland/Elsevier.
Lainer, R, Wagner, I (2000) Silent Architecture - Narrative Technology. Digital Creativity 11,3, 144-155.
Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge Univ. Press, NY.
Norman, D. (1993) Things that make us smart. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Ma.
Resnick, L.B. (ed) (1989) Knowing, Learning, and Instruction. Essays in Honor of Robert Glaser. Lawrence Erlbaum Ass,
         Hillsdale, NJ.
Svanæs, D. (1997) Kinaesthetic Thinking: The Tacit Dimension of Interaction Design. Computers in Human Behavior, 13,
         4, 443-463.
