Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   507

           Compadres: Lightweight Support for Distributed
                                                   Collaborators
                                                     Brian R. Johnson
                                Design Machine Group, University of Washington
                                                    brj@u.washington.edu
ABSTRACT
Design education has a strong reliance on passive presence awareness and unfocused interaction. This paper reports on
Compadres, a system for support of distributed collaborators through creation of group presence awareness on the web.
Compadres   provides   various   configurable   communications       options, in  both  synchronous    and asynchronous     modes,
including  links for  email,  chat, and  file transfer. It  includes two  levels  of  presence awareness:  current   status and an
extended radar view providing "asynchronous presence." The system supports itinerant, or mobile, users (such as students)
as well as situated users (such as faculty).
Our experiences with Compadres, which has been used by several classes and our research group, support those of others
regarding the power of presence and messaging in supporting group cohesion, and indicate that it is possible to support
infrequent or occasional collaboration as well as frequent interaction via the web.

Keywords
Web, collaboration, presence awareness, workgroup awareness, Compadres

INTRODUCTION
Design education,    based   on "studio"  education   and     "project-based  learning" has become   something    of a model    for
education. As    pressures and   opportunities     increase to   replace or  supplement   face-to-face educational   models   with
computer-supported paradigms, it makes sense to look for insights within computer-supported design education. Donald
Schön (1987) has written extensively about interactions within the studio and the role of what Goffman, (1963) calls
"unfocused  interaction"   in the   education   of  architects.  The  traditional  design  studio format   is intended   to  create
opportunities to overhear and observe interactions between others, including the studio mentor. Personal stereo systems and
headphones  are  often banned    during  class  hours   as  a consequence,    even though   students are working    independently.
Nonetheless, a number of experiments have been conducted using Internet and web-based collaboration tools to conduct
"virtual design studios" involving design students collaborating on a project from different cities and time zones.
Research in Computer Supported Collaborative Work (CSCW) and Computer Mediated Communication (CMC) has often
focused on support of distributed workers through digital replication of collocation communication options, particularly
features of directed, or "focused" interaction (Dourish & Bly, 1992). Other research has found benefits from collocation of
team members (Heath and Luff, 1996; Teasley, 2000), and some have found deleterious impacts of distributed work models
in large corporations (Herbsleb, et al., 2000).
Based  on  our own    experience,   we  became     interested in awareness    and web-based  workgroup     presence. A survey   of
available tools supported the conclusion that a communications framework was needed, not a new communication tool.
Task-oriented synchronous collaboration systems employing awareness have been shown to increase user satisfaction.
Previous experience suggested that support for both asynchronous and synchronous communications was important. User
Interface design  guidelines  suggested   that simplification    of the  communication    options would  be   good.  The resulting
system, by extending the communication functions of the user's computer environment, supports individual awareness of
and participation  in the  group.   It was   first implemented    in 1998    and  has been  undergoing   informal evaluation   and
refinement since then.
THE COMPADRES FRAMEWORK
The Compadres system was developed to investigate unfocused interaction, through a web-based presence awareness and
communication interface. Of particular interest is the support of loosely-coupled distributed groups. This encompasses not
only full time workers, but also mutual support in seminar courses, on-line office hours for educators, distance education
groups, and research groups.
Lightweight Client Interface
In Compadres we sought an extremely light-weight client with a focus on communication and a group presence monitor.
No special hardware was to be required. A graphical web browser provides the client interface. The use of screen space was
minimized. Data processing is handled by a web server application and "back-end" database. Users may use any networked
workstation, including those in shared labs, and access Compadres by simply directing the browser to the correct URL.
The presence monitor (at the top of Figure 1) shows current group membership and individual connection status (through
varied background colors­green for connected users, pink for absent ones). The display automatically refreshes several
times a minute to reflect changing presence conditions within the group.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  508

Figure 1. Compadres window, showing presence monitor, user data page, and history graphic.
The Personal Data Page
Each user of Compadres has a personal data page (a portion of one is shown in the bottom area of Figure 1). This display
provides the contact information that the individual wishes to share with other group members. The appropriate display is
selected by clicking a name from the presence monitor at the top.
The "History" or "Extended Presence" Graphic
The personal data includes (center-right) a graphic showing presence over time. This gray-scale density map shows the
pattern and relative amount of time this user was connected during the previous two weeks. It supports collaboration
through "way-laying" behavior, and provides an "extended presence" indicator for asynchronous users.
Messaging & the "Door Sign"
When viewing the data page of a user, the one-line form may be used to write them a quick note. However, when viewing
your own data page, this same input field may be used to quickly update the Door-sign activity status message (just below
the photograph). Each individual's Door Sign is displayed as part of their data page.
CONCLUSIONS
Compadres   has been   made  available experimentally as part of   several courses    (a total of around 40 people), and by
members of our research group. After using the system for a period of time ranging from a few days to several months, they
were asked to provide feedback. Responses indicate that the features mentioned above­presence monitor, personal contact
data pages, and history graphic­were found valuable. These preliminary results suggest that Compadres does contribute to
group identity and cohesion, and does present users with recognizable benefits.
Additional information available at http://www.caup.washington.edu/software/compadres/.
REFERENCES
Dourish, P. and S. Bly (1992) "Portholes: Supporting Awareness in a Distributed Work Group", in Proceedings of SIG CHI
         '92, pp 541-547.
Goffman, E. (1963) Behavior in Public Places, The Free Press of Glencoe.
Heath, C. and P. Luff (1996) "Convergent Activities: line control and passenger information on the London underground"
         in Y. Engestrom & D. Middleton (eds.) Cognition and Communication at Work, pp96-129, Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Herbsleb, J., A. Mockus, T. Finholt, R. Grinter (2000) "Distance, Dependencies, and Delay in Global Collaboration" in
         Proceedings of CSCW 2000 (Philadelphia, December , 2000).
Schön, D. (1987) Educating the Reflective Practitioner, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Teasley, S. et  al., (2000) "How  Does   Radical Collocation  Help   a Team     Succeed?"   in  Proceedings of CSCW    2000
         (Philadelphia, December , 2000)
