Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  509

                     Project-based Learning with CommSy
                                     Michael Janneck, Wolf-Gideon Bleek
                             University of Hamburg, Department for Informatics
                                    [janneck|bleek]@informatik.uni-hamburg.de
ABSTRACT
Project-based learning has long been an important element in teaching informatics topics, because it allows students to
acquire important social and methodological competences in addition to professional competence. Groupware systems are
increasingly used in such settings.   In our paper, we present the  didactic    concept we have  applied  to more than ten
cooperative educational projects over the last few years. We describe how electronic media have become an integral part of
our concept and we introduce CommSy a web-based application, designed specifically to fit the needs of project-based
learning.

Keywords
Project-based learning, learning communities, community system, CommSy

INTRODUCTION
Current work practice in the IT industry is characterized by cooperative work in small multidisciplinary teams. Therefore,
social and methodological competences gain importance compared to professional competence, i.e. knowledge in a subject
area. Obviously, those competences cannot be learned individually in lectures or traditional seminars, but require practice
and being engaged in a real-world context. We address this problem by offering cooperative educational projects to our
students with a didactic concept that focusses on authentic work practice. With the interdisciplinary mixture of students in
our classes, the high number of "part-time students" (working a lot beside their studies) and the geographically dispersed
campus of the University of Hamburg, our organizational setting suggests itself to the introduction of a groupware system
into our didactic concept. Furthermore, by using electronic media in our educational projects, students can learn how to use
computers to push their work and to communicate with their fellow project members.

PROJECT-BASED LEARNING
Our didactics for project-based learning is based on Dewey's (1966) educational philosophy. The following principles form
the basis of our didactic concept:
 · Cooperative construction of a task: Together with the students, we construct their task within a broad area given by the
   subject of the course. To be educationally valid, the task should be both, enjoyable and of practical relevance, and it
   must be demanding and provoke the desire for more information.
 · Teamwork: The students work on the chosen task for the whole term. They organize their work processes themselves,
   and they have to thoroughly document their work process and their findings. Usually project teams are formed in
   groups of three to five students, to work on different aspects of the task.
 · Plenary sessions: Weekly plenary sessions are used to handle organizational tasks and to reflect on the work process as
   well as for invited talks on relevant topics, for teaching basics, and for presenting preliminary findings. At the end of
   the term, the project group presents its results to a larger audience. Presenting results fosters a process of mutual
   teaching and learning among the students (Brown et al. 1993).
 · Coaching the learning process: As teachers, we take on the roles of "coaches." Our job is to set the conditions and to
   give impulses to the project work.
According to Bastian and Gudjons, two activities are central to project-based learning:
 · Communication plays a major role, because successful communication is the basis for all social interaction. That is
   coordinating team-work, negotiating positions and responsibilities within the team, sharing one's own perspectives on a
   given problem with other team members, and so on.
 · The handling of working material is important, because a proper selection and rating of information sources is the basis
   for any informed decision made within the project. The presentation of work results in the form of new working
   material (e.g. reports) are the foundation for further project work.

SOFTWARE SUPPORT FOR PROJECT-BASED LEARNING
Software used in an educational project should support these central activities of project work. Therefore it should provide a
means of   computer-mediated communication,     to  allow students to    discuss their topics without the plenary sessions.
Information that should be shared by technical means are a list of the relevant literature, announcements, and other working
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  510

material. Together with colleagues, we applied our didactic concept to more than ten projects over the last years. Computer
support was first introduced in our projects by a mailing list as a tool for coordination and a shared directory to distribute
documents. Later, we used Lotus Notes and Swiki in some projects and considered other tools as well. To better support
our didactic concept with a software tool, we developed the web-based system CommSy as a suitable solution and found
that it fits our needs more adequately.
CommSy (See http://www.commsy.org for more information on CommSy and our work) stands for Community System and
 is a web-based system to support communication and coordination in project groups. CommSy supports communication in
 multiple ways: News and events can be announced, in a discussion forum, specific topics can be discussed, each member
 has a   personal homepage     to present  him/herself  to  the  group,  and   annotations can  be made   to every    item in
 CommSyproject room. Working material can be collected in a simple reference manager and put in context by attaching
 them  to any  other item   (e.g. an    announced  event). A   group-editor is available for cooperative writing   of HTML
 documents. The following design principles distinguish CommSy from other software products:
 · Easy individual use: Enabling individuals to easily use CommSy is a prerequisite for any project member to actively
   engage in the work without having to overcome technical barriers. We achieve this by implementing only required
   functionality and a simple structure across the whole system.
 · Transparency   in cooperative   usage: CommSy     gives special emphasis    to user communities  rather than  individuals:
   CommSy is exclusively accessible to members of a certain group and each user's name is recorded with every item s/he
   creates. Every project room can be customized to help build a group identity.
 · No concept of roles: "Ownership" is the sole access right in CommSy. Only the owner of an item may modify or delete
   it. Apart from this rule, every member of a CommSy is allowed to do everything and to see everything. There is no
   distinction between  students   and   teachers. By that,  CommSy   reflects  social manners  we  promote  in  day  to day
   interaction with our students, like self-responsibility and commitment.

DISCUSSION
Introducing software to educational projects is a significant intervention in learning processes, it must therefore address the
needs determined by the didactic concept. In the projects we offered to students during the last two years, we found that the
use of CommSy is indeed a significant enhancement of our didactic concept. But the sole availability of a good software
tool does neither automagically result in the sensible use of the software nor any use at all. It is important to negotiate
conventions of software use early within a project. This is eased by the given structure of CommSy, but still one has to
decide, for example, how often project members want to read new items or in which file format documents should be
uploaded so that everyone can easily read and write them. In addition to those group-decisions, one has to individually
judge the relevance of one's own items and how to present them to the group. We found that students reflected much more
on their communication   practice  after  the introduction of  software, because  it became  an explicit topic. It was  quite
common, that new conventions and use practices were invented by them. Also, the project work was pushed ahead, because
students had access to the working material of their team colleagues earlier, and access to the (preliminary) results of other
project teams allowed for a broader insight into the subject area of a project. The work with literature received more
attention, because all references were instantly available to all students without a big effort; it was thus attractive to add
new references to the pool.

REFERENCES
Bastian, J., and Gudjons, H. (1994, 1998) Das Projektbuch, Bd. 1 & Bd. 2. Bergmann/Helbig, Hamburg, Germany.
Brown, A. L., Ash, D., Rutherford, M., Nakagawa, K., Gordon, A., Campione., J. C. (1993) Distributed Expertise in the
         Classroom.  In Salomon,    G.   (publ.):  Distributed cognitions:  psychological  and  educational  considerations.
         Cambridge University Press, UK, pp. 188­228.
Dewey, J. (1966) Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education. Free Press, New York, USA,
         first published 1916.
