Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  511

                      Mathematical Discussion System
                                                     Gabe Johnson
                                                 University of Colorado
                                                johnsogg@cs.colorado.edu
ABSTRACT
The Mathematical Discussion System (MDS) enables students and instructors to hold embedded discourse in an online
electronic text. These contextualized conversations are recorded and are able to improve the value of the text for students,
instructors, authors, and publishers.

Keywords
embedded discourse, hypertext, SER, collaborative learning, discussion moderation

INTRODUCTION
While studying, students may encounter breakdowns in comprehension, and they may need to consult other resources
before being able to move forward. In these cases, many people find a friend or a teacher that may be able to help. Another
outlet for a struggling student can be the Internet. In both cases, the cause of the breakdown as well as the solution are
rarely recorded. The MDS addresses this problem by reducing the distance between the source of the breakdown and a
subsequent discussion. The discourse is recorded in the MDS for others so that if they need help on the same topic, there
may be a discussion embedded in the relevant portion of the text. In a way, the text becomes a well-known place in which
students and instructors can discuss course material without needing to be temporally or spatially collocated.
The MDS naturally supports the Seed-Evolve-Reseed [Fischer, et. al] process. Because the conversations are recorded
within the original text, these discussions add value to the material. From the student point of view, using an online text that
has conversations about the material may be much more useful than the same text without such embedded conversation.
For instructors, the discussion forums can serve as an excellent way to understand what the students are struggling with, so
that those topics can receive more attention in class. For book authors or publishers, embedded discourse can serve as
embedded reader feedback, suitable for reference in future revisions. The original text serves as a seed; the discussions
provide an evolution process for that seed; and the act of reflecting and changing teaching behavior, or the text itself, can be
seen as reseeding.

PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT
During the summer of 2000, we built a prototype system to be used by an undergraduate differential equations course at the
University of Colorado. We wanted to study how well such a prototype would facilitate learning and discussion between
classmates and instructors.
In one manner of thinking, the electronic text provides a sort of "virtual place" for students and instructors to discuss course
material within the context of course material. The electronic text becomes a location where readers can expect to find
topical conversations. The discussion forums are very similar to today's Internet newsgroups, the MDS prototype provides
a number of features (discussed below) to the discussion forums that extend the utility of standard newsgroups.
Due to the  inherent attributes of    an ASCII   newsgroup, many  students have found  them to be  inadequate      modes of
communication. For example, it is difficult to relate mathematical equations or other symbols not found on a QWERTY-
keyboard. The MDS enables people to insert such symbols into their messages--addressing the limitation of ASCII-only
newsgroups.
One major limitation of web-based discussion forums stems from the pull nature of web sites. In general, people happen
upon discussions that interest them by browsing. It can be difficult to remain engaged in these forums because the user
must actively look for new messages, rather than receiving them passively, as is the case with email [dePaula 2001].
People reading an MDS text are presented with colored squares next to each paragraph. These squares represent places
where  conversations  take   place    regarding the surrounding paragraph.  We  call these squares hooks,       because  the
conversations are thought to be hanging off the main text. These hooks are color coded to indicate activity. If there are new
messages relating to the paragraph, the hook is red. Otherwise, the hook ranges from light blue (indicating a few messages)
to dark blue (indicating many messages). When the reader clicks on a hook, a discussion forum interface is presented.
Users may not place their own hooks. In initial designs of the MDS, users were given the ability to create their own hooks
based on arbitrary portions of text. Users could select a few words, sentences or even paragraphs, and comment on the
selected text. This was problematic because after a number of people had created their own hooks, the page was visually
cluttered. The hooks began to distract from the text of the page. We chose to give the page author the responsibility of
marking up the page with hooks in order to avoid this problem.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 512

Another problem inherent in online discussion forums is the presence of a large number of poorly thought out or erroneous
postings. It is possible that a posting with incorrect content can lead students to believe things that are not true, but it is also
possible that these `bad' postings can be used to understand student's misconceptions and to use them as opportunities to
set things straight. We have implemented a moderation system in the MDS which is very similar to the moderation system
used by Slashdot [http://slashdot.org]. When a person reads a message and finds it to be particularly good or bad, he or she
can give or take away a moderation point. After a number of people have read a message, it may achieve a good or bad
moderation score. This score can be used to filter messages so that only messages above a certain threshold are displayed.
Each user may set his own moderation threshold, so that all posts may be shown, or only the most highly rated posts are
shown. This      helps users sort out the potentially good  messages from the  large numbers  of superfluous posts  that are
common within so many of today's newsgroups.

FUTURE WORK
The current MDS system remains a prototype. To better understand how the MDS can enhance learning, the prototype
should be improved to a state that it can be used by a large number of students. Initially, we intended to use the MDS in a
differential equations course at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Clearly, the MDS can be used outside of the domain of
mathematics. We would like to study how the MDS is used by students in different fields such as engineering, the arts, and
literature.
A clear design flaw in the current implementation of the prototype is that the seed text must be marked up by hand so that it
can be used by the MDS. First, the text must be converted to HTML, then hooks must be inserted into that. This is a
complicated process, and for our implementation to become more widely used, an easier method of marking up documents
must be created. We would like to create a web page that serves as a proxy for marking up arbitrary HTML pages on the
Internet so they can be used with the MDS. This way, authors can save their documents as HTML and put them on web
pages, without having to convert their work for use with the MDS. In fact, authors may not even be aware of the MDS's
existence--people could distribute a URL and ask other people to discuss that web page via the MDS proxy service.
The true    test of the  MDS   prototype  would be    to conduct a full-scale study of the system within a   real classroom
environment. The primary aspect of the prototype we wish to study is the embedded discourse, but we would also like to
study the usefulness of the features of the discussion forum enumerated above.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Dr. James Curry of the Applied Mathematics department for his support of this project. Thanks to Eric
Wright and Rian Bogle for their role in building the MDS concept and prototype.

REFERENCES
Fischer, G. (1998) "Seeding, Evolutionary Growth and Reseeding: Constructing, Capturing and Evolving Knowledge in
     Domain Oriented Design Environments," Automated Software Engineering, 5(4), pp. 447-464
dePaula, R., Fischer, G., Ostwald., J. (2001) "Courses as Seeds: Expectations and Realities," Proceedings of the European
     Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 2001 (Euro-CSCL 2001) pp. 494-501
