Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page 513

Online Collaborative Learning as a Catalyst for Systemic
Change in the Teaching-Learning Process Within a Multi-
                    Campus Institution of Higher Education
                                                       Carlos Enrique Gonzalez, Paul Resta
          Monterrey Institute of Technology                           Learning Technology Center, College
       and Higher Education-Mexico City                           of Education, University of Texas at Austin
                   cegonzal@campus.ccm.itesm.mx                    resta@mail.utexas.edu

ABSTRACT
This short paper describes an innovative and strategic cross-institutional collaborative project between Monterrey Institute
of Technology and Higher Education (ITESM), Mexico, and the University of Texas at Austin (UT) to support systemic
change in the teaching-learning process at ITESM. The purpose of the document is to share the scope, framework, content,
and strategies for preparing faculty to serve as change agents, mentors and trainees of colleagues in the use of online and
face-to-face collaborative learning strategies and tools. The UT-ITESM Summer Institute on Collaborative Learning and
planned follow-on activities with 50 faculty is referred as one of the key components in such institutional effort.

INTRODUCTION
Higher Education has contributed to the development of societies throughout history. The Higher Education enterprise has
shown its sustainability, adaptability and transformative capability during the last 800 years. But now it has "to develop the
most radical transformation and renewal ever made" (UNESCO, 1998). Such transformation is often referred to as "The
Learning Revolution" and will take place in a new era of global digital competition in higher education.
Consistent with this trend, ITESM is in the process of renewal and is changing the paradigm of the university. Monterrey
Institute of Technology was founded in 1943 by a group of Mexican businessmen as a non-profit, private institution of
higher education.    Today,  ITESM   (http://www.sistema.itesm.mx)       is a   leading   nationwide  educational   system   of
international scope  with 31 branches   in 27   cities throughout Mexico    and subsidiary   offices in North  America,    Latin
America and Europe. SACS (Southern Association of Colleges and Schools) accredits all ITESM campuses that award
bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees. Currently, ITESM has a student enrollment of 93,000 and 7500 faculty members.
ITESM   offers  high school, undergraduate   and  graduate    programs  in  different fields such  as Engineering,    Computer
Science, Architecture, Business, Social Sciences and Humanities.
According to ITESM mission statement (http://www.sistema.itesm/mision) a new educational approach is required. As
business tries to keep pace with the changes brought about by globalization and technology, the need for skilled and
flexible graduates has risen substantially. The desired educational philosophy of ITESM provides a focus on the students'
development of knowledge, intellectual skills, and values and attitudes necessary to be effective and contributing members
of Mexican society.

ITESM EDUCATIONAL PARADIGM
The redefinition  and redesign  of  the  ITESM    teaching-learning   process  represents   an institutional effort to develop
individuals with deep knowledge in their academic field and with the desired attributes of honesty and integrity, the ability
to be innovative and flexible, work collaboratively, think critically and solve problems, and start on the path as life-long
learners. ITESM faculty is expected to transition from primary use of teacher-centered direct instruction and lecture-based
teaching to the creation of more student-centered, interactive and collaborative learning environments. ITESM recognizes
that the present teacher-centered focus on knowledge transfer and systematic instruction emphasizes individualized work,
and uses few technological applications.
ITESM also recognizes that a plan must be developed to assist faculty members in migrating toward a new educational
approach  focused on  knowledge    construction  and   collaborative learning.  This  educational  paradigm   involves   faculty
integrating cognitive tools into their instructional practices and generating new learning environments in which students are
more active and responsible for their own learning. To accomplish this goal it is essential to help the faculty transition from
their present roles as information transmitters to facilitators of learning and for students to take greater responsibility for
their own learning. ITESM's desired educational model emphasizes both knowledge and formative objectives; a set of
predetermined values, attitudes and skills that must drive the teaching-learning process.
The ITESM Faculty Development Program (i.e. FDP) was designed to facilitate the transition to the new paradigm. It has a
four-stage sequential framework lasting 350 hours for full time faculty members and 210 hours for part-time professors. In
addition, ITESM   required  lap top computers    of    most students and provided  lap    tops to faculty and  staff.  A strong
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  514

investment in Information Technology infrastructure for all ITESM campuses enabled high speed networks with huge
capacity servers to host "redesigned courses" under Learning Space (a client/user-server application) within the Lotus
Notes groupware environment.

UT-ITESM ONLINE COLLABORATIVE LEARNING PROJECT
With the technology infrastructure and learning resources in place, ITESM has focused its efforts on systemic change in the
teaching-learning    process by  helping  the faculty incorporate  collaborative learning as an  essential component    of their
teaching practices. To assist ITESM in accomplishing this goal, a cross-institutional collaborative project was designed to
provide intensive faculty development and online support for a cadre of 50 faculty who will serve as change agents,
trainers, and mentors to help other faculty in their home campuses understand the theories, strategies and technology tools
of collaborative learning. The project involved close collaboration between ITESM, the University of Texas at Austin
Learning Technology Center and the University of Minnesota Cooperative Learning Center in planning, conducting, and
evaluating an intensive three week summer institute for an outstanding group of faculty members from ITESM branches.
The Summer Institute 2001 was held at the University of Texas at Austin and provided the participants with an opportunity
to experience online and face-to-face collaborative learning as they themselves designed online collaborative learning
components for their own courses. In doing so, ITESM faculty became part of a knowledge-building community in which
they were able to share expertise and best practices, and assist each other in solving pedagogical problems of online
learning.
The  Institute   provided participants   with  a specially designed   Web-based   course  on    Online Collaborative  Learning
(http://www.edb.utexas.edu/resta/itesm2001/) so that they would all experience the process of building virtual learning
teams and participate in online collaborative learning projects and activities. An online collaborative learning environment
was established to enable the participants to learn the tools and strategies for Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
(CSCL). A virtual space using First Class groupware was created to enable the participants, who are distributed over the
entire country, to continue to work together and support each other's efforts to change teaching-learning practices at their
campuses. A metaphor of virtual ITESM Collaborative Technologies Center (CTC) was used in designing the virtual space
and project activities. The participants were asked to be members of this new center that will serve as the catalyst for
helping all ITESM faculty learn to use the new tools and strategies for collaborative learning.
During the three weeks, the participants also engaged in classroom learning activities focused on the theory and strategies
of collaborative learning, face-to-face collaborative learning, the design of online collaborative learning projects, and the
development of strategies and plans for the mentoring and training of faculty within their home campuses. Although the
Institute was successful, the faculty members require continued and ongoing support as they plan and implement these
strategies in  their classes   during the next   academic  year. Therefore, online support   is provided   and some  follow-on
activities are planned to support the individual, base group and regional group collaborative projects.
UT ITESM Summer Institute participants embody a critical mass that may influence the whole organization from a down-
top perspective. It is recognized, however, that a parallel and intertwined top-down effort is also needed to support the
ITESM faculty collaborative learning initiatives. Such an effort requires informing and engaging the institution's leaders in
the effort and helping them in their role as transformational leaders if deep changes are to be made in the teaching-learning
process.
In summary,     ITESM    has   taken  on an enormous   challenge   to transform  the teaching-learning  process  across  its 31
campuses. Such an effort is unprecedented and will involve change efforts on a massive scale. A key component of the
change strategy is helping faculty integrate online and face-to-face collaborative learning into their instructional practices.
It is recognized that this is not an easy effort and will be successful only with bottom-up and top-down leadership and
support.   This  project  will also   provide a  new  environment   and  opportunity  to  explore  new   strategies for faculty
development and support through the use of online learning communities and tools. The results of this effort will help
inform other institutions of higher education facing similar challenges.

REFERENCES
UNESCO (1998) World's Declaration on Higher Education. World's Conference on Higher Education in the XXI Century.
          Paris.
