Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 517

     Using "Thinking Tags" to Improve Understanding in
                           Science: A Genetics Simulation
                           Kimberley A. MacKinnon, Susan Yoon, Gail Andrews
              Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto (OISE/UT)
          kmackinnon@oise.utoronto.ca, syoon@oise.utoronto.ca & gsandrews@oise.utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
In this study, small wearable microprocessor-driven GroupWear tags (Thinking Tags) are pre-programmed to run a genetics
simulation and used in a science classroom in order to investigate the effects on the nature and quality of discourse among
students. Preliminary data suggest that Thinking Tags provide an effective method of instruction that can be used to address
misconceptions in science that persist despite traditional pedagogical interventions.

Keywords
Science, technology, GroupWear, Thinking Tags, genetics, probability, participatory simulation, discourse

INTRODUCTION
Rosalind Driver, in her book titled Children's Ideas in Science (1985) discusses how children bring pre-conceived ideas
about the world to science class, and that often these ideas have been reinforced from a very young age. Hence, science
lessons may   be perceived  as   counterintuitive when   these ideas  do not correspond  to accepted theory. It  is therefore
important for students to be able to understand and evaluate a variety of conceptions. One means of accomplishing this goal
may be via students' collaborative discourse since emergent ideas are brought out into the open and treated as artifacts that
can be modified and improved (Bereiter, in press).
Heim (1991) states that, dominance and recessiveness of alleles is one of the most commonly misunderstood concepts in
elementary genetics. Inheritance is an important and basic component in the study of genetics, yet it has been shown that
students of all ages have much difficulty with its related concepts (Heim, 1991; Solomon, Johnson, Zaitchik & Carey, 1996;
Banet & Ayuso, 1999; Weissman & Kalish, 1999; Lewis & Wood-Robinson, 2000). In a study by Lewis & Robinson
(2000) students nearing the end of compulsory science education showed a marked level of misunderstanding, even of the
most seemingly   basic  concepts    of genetics.  They  explain that, "[a]lthough there  was  some  recognition  that sexual
reproduction leads to an increase in genetic variation there was little awareness that this is the main purpose of sexual
reproduction and is achieved through the process of fertilization ­ the fusion of genetic information from two different
individuals" (p. 187).

THINKING TAGS IN SCIENCE
The MIT Media Laboratory has been at work developing small wearable microprocessors called Thinking Tags (Tags).
These Tags are about the size of a small palm pilot and are equipped with infrared ports and sensors, lights and a small
display panel however, they can also come with motors and various other sensory equipment.
A recent project at the MIT laboratory used these devices with children for the purpose of creating their own scientific
instruments. Through a series of narratives they tell how the children, through working with the Tags, showed a marked
level of motivation and critical capacity. They go on to say that, a constructionist "scientific instrument design has the
potential for sparking  interest in scientific issues  among   students who  otherwise  would avoid  the subject altogether"
(Resnick, Berg & Eisenberg, 2000).
One of the most salient features of the Tags is their ability to create a system of feedback, from which the students may gain
increased understanding. Each Tag has the ability to send and receive information via an infrared signal, and can also
display information, using lights, sounds and a mini digital display screen. Each of these features is then able to function in
a constant loop of sending, receiving and displaying information, allowing students to obtain information from their Tag,
almost instantaneously.

THE GENETICS SIMULATION
Using the programming language Cricket Logo, a simple genetics program was created to introduce students to some basic
concepts related to inheritance. In the Genetics Simulation, each Tag is programmed with a specific genotype that is not
initially known to the students. The only information given to the students is their eye colour (phenotype), which is either
green (dominant) or red (recessive), and their task is to meet with other Tags and observe the total probability and random
selection of eye colour of their "virtual offspring".
In the simulation, four lights, each lighting up as either green or red depending on the genotypes of both Tags that are
meeting, denotes the total probability of eye colour (phenotypes) for the "virtual offspring". For instance, if a heterozygous
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page   518

green-eyed Tag met a homozygous red-eyed Tag, the total phenotypic probability would show as two green lights and two
red lights. Then, to reveal the eye colour selection, students press a blue button on the Tag so that one of the lights is
randomly selected to remain on, while the other three are shut off. Students then record this information following each
meeting and discuss their ideas about the results.

DISCUSSION
Banet and Ayuso (1999) state that, "traditional teaching strategies have little effect on students' acquisition of meaningful
understanding of inheritance, which suggests that significant changes should be made in both curriculum planning and the
sequence of teaching" (p. 314). We believe that the Genetics Simulation provides a concrete experience with the underlying
rules for  the process   of acquiring  inherited   characteristics, and we  anticipate  that the  saliency of  the  experience  will
stimulate  an  interest  and quality   of critical discourse that   would   otherwise  be missed   using   traditional pedagogical
approaches.
Ongoing research using Thinking Tag technology has shown promising results for prompting student interest, critical
discourse and conceptual understanding. A companion study that examines understanding the importance of dental hygiene
among   kindergarten     students, has  shown    that participatory   simulations   can  have   a positive   effect on  conceptual
development in very young children (Andrews, MacKinnon & Yoon, see this volume).
Preliminary    pilot data from  the   Genetics Simulation,   collected   from  two   groups  of   graduate students,   indicate that
discussion during the activity appears to be mediated by content-based inquiries. Furthermore, students seem to become
immersed in a "first-person experience" (Colella, n.d.), identifying with the characteristics of their Tag, and gathering
information from their interactions within the group, suggesting that the technology has increased their effort at meaning-
making. Current investigations will be examining the effects of the Genetics Simulation and the Thinking Tag technology
with intermediate, secondary and graduate (non-science) students.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to Dr. Earl Woodruff and the Thinking Tag Committee at OISE/UT for their support.

REFERENCES
Andrews, G., MacKinnon, K. A. & Yoon, S. (2001). Using "Thinking Tags" with Kindergarten Children: A Dental Health
          Simulation. Poster session to be presented at the annual Computer Support for Collaborative Learning Conference,
          January 2002, Boulder, CO.
Banet, E. & Ayuso, E. (1999). Teaching Genetics at Secondary School: A Strategy for Teaching about the Location of
          Inheritance Information. Science Education, 84(3), pp. 313 ­ 351.
Bereiter, C. (in press). Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age. Erlbaum, Toronto.
Colella, V. (n.d.). Participatory Simulations: Exploring Dynamic Systems through Real World Interactions. Retrieved from
          http://vanessa.www.media.mit.edu/people/vanessa/part-sims/index.html.
Driver, R., Guesne, E. & Tiberghien, A. (1985). Children's Ideas in Science. Open University Press, Philadelphia.
Heim, W. G. (1991). What Is a Recessive Allele? The American Biology Teacher, 53(2), (February).
Lewis,  J. &   Wood-Robinson,      C.  (2000). Genes,   chromosomes,     cell division  and  inheritance   ­ do  students see   any
          relationship? International Journal of Science Education, 22(2), pp. 177 ­ 195.
Resnick,   M., Berg,   B  &  Eisenberg,   M. (2000).  Beyond    Black   Boxes:   Bringing Transparency     and Aesthetics Back    to
          Scientific   Investigation   [Electronic    version].     Journal   of  the   Learning    Sciences.    Retrieved      from
          http://el.www.media.mit.edu/groups/el/Papers/mres/bbb-jls/.
Solomon,   G.  E.    A., Johnson,   S. C., Zaitchik,  D.  &  Carey,     S.  (1996). Like  Father,  Like  Son:   Young   Children's
          Understanding of How and Why Offspring Resemble Their Parents. Child Development, 67, pp. 151 ­ 171.
Weissman, M. D. & Kalish, C. W. (1999). The Inheritance of Desired Characteristics: Children's View of the Role of
          Intention in Parent-Offspring Resemblance. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 73, pp. 245 ­ 265.
