Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   519

     Collaborative Network-Based Virtual Reality: The Past,
 the Present, and the Future of the Virtual Solar System
                                                         Project
                               Kenneth E. Hay, Dean M. Elliott, Beaumie Kim
                                                   University of Georgia
                     khay@coe.uga.edu                delliott@coe.uga.edu      bkim@coe.uga.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper and presentation describe an ongoing research and development effort to create a virtual reality environment in
which students cohabitate, collaborate, and co-construct shared meanings of astronomical phenomena in an undergraduate
introductory astronomy course. Initial versions of this environment addressed face-to-face and asynchronous methods of
collaboration. The most recent iteration of our work incorporates the use of advanced networking technologies to enable
synchronous   collaboration  between     students in two primary  collaborative  learning  activities: co-construction and  co-
habitation of virtual models of the solar system. Co-construction refers to multiple students working together to construct a
common virtual model. Co-habitation refers to the ability to simultaneously experience the same virtual model from either
common or multiple perspectives.

Keywords
Virtual reality, modeling-based inquiry, solar system

INTRODUCTION
Consider a scenario where groups of students studying solar eclipses collaboratively co-construct a shared world within a
3D Virtual Reality (VR) modeling environment. After creating the world, students position themselves to view the eclipse
from different perspectives: one on the Sun, one on the near side of the Moon, one out in space, and four others at differing
latitudes on the surface of the Earth. Visualization techniques they are using show the umbra and penumbra shadows of the
moon as it approaches the earth. Similarly, they see the orbital paths of the moon and earth as well as the line of nodes.
These students talk to each other on a networked party line where they describe their perspectives to each other in real time
while watching the eclipse. They can tell each other what they see and when an eclipse is happening, and describe this to
each other not simply in terms of the eclipse they see unfolding but in terms of their positions and the elements of their
model that they have visualized. At critical times they stop the model and call everyone over to their perspectives, they lead
each other from perspective to perspective exploring the interrelationships between the elements of their model. In the
future they extend this collaborative exploration into collaborative prediction where they predict if an eclipse comes, and if
it does, what kind it is, when it occurs, how fast it travels, and what kind of path it takes. The preceding scenario is our
vision of what we are developing in the context of a collaborative, inquiry-based undergraduate astronomy course using
non-immersive   VR   modeling   and  visualization    software. This paper and    presentation will    begin by  describing the
theoretical and empirical foundations of an ongoing research and development effort to explore the educational potential of
virtual reality in learning environments.
Virtual Solar System Project
The Virtual Solar System (VSS) project (Hay & Barab, 1998) is an education reform effort in undergraduate one-credit
astronomy laboratory course. Students in the course create virtual 3D computational models of the solar system within a
Modeling-based    Inquiry pedagogical    framework.   Core  inquiry activities currently include three   themes:  phases of the
moon, eclipses, and seasons. Each activity begins with inquiry questions such as, "Can you create a model of a Sun-Earth-
Moon system in which the Moon keeps the same face to the Sun throughout an entire Earth year?" It should be quite clear
that students are unable to simply look up an answer to such a question in a textbook. Instead, they plan how they will build
an appropriate model and determine what data they need. Next, students build their model, validate it, and revise it as
necessary until the model works as planned. At this stage, the students' focus shifts to creating visualizations of the model
that validate the model's    suitability for answering  the inquiry questions.  Finally, they create   a report containing their
warranted conclusions, which must be supported with appropriate data and visualizations. Throughout the evolution of the
VSS, we have used computer technologies to enable face-to-face, asynchronous, and synchronous collaborations among the
students and the instructor.

RESEARCH: VSS + ASYNCHRONOUS COLLABORATION
Our investigation of whether asynchronous collaboration enhanced this learning environment began with a group of four
learners in an exploratory study of asynchronous computer-supported collaboration. This group worked in a classroom
setting for the first few weeks, then began working independently from home. In order to provide appropriate technology
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  520

supports, we  developed    a course website  that contained    a range  of course  resources,  grading  utilities, assignments,
asynchronous collaboration tools and communication facilities. The communications facilities included "ask the professor",
a professor course messaging system, and a group threaded discussion area. This exploratory study indicated that students
could effectively work independently in this environment and could effectively use the model building tools and access the
informational resources. Much to our dismay, the students did not use the asynchronous collaboration tools at all. They
reported that in order to use the VR software effectively they needed at least one hour of uninterrupted time, preferably two.
They wanted help immediately when they encountered difficulties in order not to lose the flow they had established. The
learners' solution to this collaboration problem was to use asynchronous communications to set a time for a phone call
between classmates and to use that time to talk each other through problems while each was actively engaged with the
software.

DEVELOPMENT: VSS + SYNCHRONOUS NETWORK-BASED COLLABORATION
We believe the immediacy of communication is related to the high level of learner engagement needed to work effectively
in this complex cognitive environment. Once students were engaged they did not want to disrupt their flow. In order to
resolve these  issues,  we   are currently  developing   advanced  network   technologies   that  enable students    to interact
synchronously  with  their   classmates and instructors.  This model   of  computer-supported     synchronous collaboration  is
designed  to  accommodate    an  anytime,  anywhere learning   model.  Access   to other  students and  the instructor  will be
possible in real-time, when their actual demands for collaboration arise. Using these synchronous technologies, students
will also be able to co-habitate and co-construct within the same virtual world. Co-construction is similar to Resnick's
(1996)  third stage  of distributed constructionism,    collaborating on  constructions.  Co-habitation  extends   the  learning
experience by allowing students to gain multiple perspectives at the same time (re. earlier example). We have identified
three primary  types of  network-based    interactions: one to one  interactions,  small group interactions,  and   presentation
interactions. One to one and small group interactions will be the primary interactions as students explore questions or as
professors/teachers support students, and will be analogous to the current small group interactions that are found when
students and teacher work together in our test bed at UGA. The presentation interaction will also be analogous to the
current practices; nevertheless, they will require new networking strategies. In the presentation mode, students will present
their findings to their entire class via the network. The size of the class could be anywhere from 20 to 300. The teacher
would also be interactively engaged with the student, asking questions, probing ideas, and clarifying concepts.

CONCLUSIONS
We have made significant progress in the development of this technology. The initial stages were focused on developing
the VR environment and curriculum to the point that students could efficiently and effectively construct their own models
to answer inquiry-based questions. The focus of the past two years has been to examine the extent to which computer-
supported  collaboration   allows  learners to co-construct    and  co-habitate   shared  virtual worlds  while    investigating
astronomical phenomena.

REFERENCES
Hay, K. E & Barab, S. A. (1998, April). Building Worlds: Tools of Virtual Practice. Paper presented at the annual meeting
         of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Resnick, M. (1996). Distributed Constructionism. In D.C. Edelson & E.A. Domeshek (Eds.), Proceedings of the Second
         International Conference on the Learning Sciences, Charlottesville, VA: AACE.
