Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page      523

     Mediating Collective Discussions Using an Intelligent
                          Argumentation-Based Framework
     Marco A. Eleuterio (*)                    Jean-Paul Barthès                           Flávio Bortolozzi
         PUC-PR/UTC                                  UTC, France                           PUC-PR, Brazil
        marcoa@hds.utc.fr                            barthes@utc.fr                   fborto@ppgia.pucpr.br

ABSTRACT
This  paper  briefly  describes   AMANDA(1),    a    framework  for   mediating collective    discussions   in distance    learning
environments. The objective of this framework is to help tutors achieve better results from group discussions and improve
knowledge transfer among the participants. The overall idea is to organize the group discussion in an argumentation tree
and involve the participants in successive discussion activities. The coordination of the discussion is made by a set of
intelligent mechanisms which reason over the discussion and propose new interactions among the participants. AMANDA
advances the discussion by generating progressive discussion cycles until a desired set of target conditions are observed. At
each  discussion   cycle, the system   redistributes discussion tasks  among  the participants   to  ensure a  desired degree     of
agreement and participation among them. In this short paper we describe the underlying coordination principles and the use
of knowledge models for producing natural language questions.

AN ARGUMENTATION-BASED STRUCTURE FOR
THE DISCUSSION
The  discussion  is organized   by  an argumentation    tree which   links
questions, answers   and   arguments.  Each  question   proposed   by  thesystem (DE node) is linked to a set of answers (ALT nodes) given byDE-1DE-nDiscussionelements
the  participants.  Each   answer   has  a  corresponding    sub-tree  of                                           Alternatives
arguments   (ARG    nodes).   The ARG    nodes express  the  intention to            Alt-1        Alt-n             (direct answers)
support or refute a given position presented by another participant. An          +          -
ARG node is formed by its intention (full/partial support, full/partial         Arg-1      Arg-nrefute)andbyafreetextexpressingthepropositionthatholdstheargument. The reasoning over the distribution and the nature of the-++Argumentationlevels
ARG nodes is the basis for coordinating the discussion.                               Arg-1      Arg-n

                                                                                       Figure 1: The discussion tree

THE TEMPORAL PROGRESS OF THE DISCUSSION
The discussion advances in periodic cycles, where the system distributes to each participant a specific discussion sheet
(figure 3) containing either questions to be answered or propositions to be analyzed. At each cycle, the system receives the
discussion sheets from all participants and builds the next discussion cycle by producing new discussion sheets (figure 4).
The construction of a discussion sheet is intentionally made so as to promote the maximum degree of knowledge exchange
among the participants. For this purpose, AMANDA uses a set of assignment mechanisms that reason over the discussion
tree and  propose   new   interactions among   the   participants. Some    mechanisms  attempt    to detect potential  discussion
situations, such as participants that disagree over a certain answer, answers given by different participants to the same
question and highly polemic positions. Other mechanisms attempt to assure that each participant takes part of all discussion
elements with similar workloads. The discussion is advanced in cycles until a satisfactory set of conditions is achieved.

THE COORDINATION PRINCIPLE
The heart of the system is the way that AMANDA builds the discussion sheets at each discussion cycle. When opening a new
discussion cycle, AMANDA analyses the current configuration of the discussion tree and decides to re-launch certain nodes,
i.e. to create new nodes and strategically assign them to the participants. The choice among which nodes to re-launch is

* Sponsored by CNPq, Brazil
(1)AMANDA - Agent de Modélisation et ANalyse de Dialogues Argumentés - is a joint R&D effort between the Pontifical
 University of Paraná, Brazil (PUC-PR), the Technology University of Compiègne, France (UTC) and their respective
 partners Siemens Telecomunicações, Brazil and Cegos, France.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                    page 524

done by evaluating each node with respect to its sub-tree and assigning it a "re-launch priority value". The nodes chosen to
be re-launched are then assigned to the corresponding participants as a result of the assignment mechanisms, as mentioned
above. AMANDA is now ready to build the personal discussion sheets for the new discussion cycle. These discussion sheets
are made available in HTML format to be fulfilled and sent back by the participants.

DOMAIN MODELING
The system uses a domain ontology and a task structure to represent the domain of discussion. They are used to produce
natural language questions that can be turned into discussion elements, i.e. DE nodes for the discussion tree. The questions
are produced based on the existing links among the concepts of the ontology, among the sub-tasks of the task structure and
between the task structure and the ontology. This feature was proposed to help the tutors elaborate the questions to be
launched for collective discussion. In practice, we were surprised how well the system can perform in producing well
formulated questions provided that the models are well constructed. We also noticed that the quality of a question can also
measure the quality of the domain modeling.

THE PROTOTYPE
AMANDA was developed in LISP and put into practice in four actual training situations. The results are promising and show
that the system can efficiently coordinate a group discussion with very low effort from the tutor and a good degree of
knowledge transfer among the participants. The prototype includes a tutor interface to view and edit the discussion tree
(figure 2) as well as an editor for building the ontology and the task structure (figure 5). The system also features an HTML
module (http server, PHP scripts and html files) which allows access to the system over the Internet. Below are some
sample screens of the system.

              Figure 2: The tutor interface

                                                                      Figure 3: A discussion sheet

  Figure 4: The interface for opening a new discussion cycle       Figure 5: The domain model editor
