Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page   527

           Introduction to the Shadow netWorkspaceTM
                      Joshua S. Gottdenker                            Herbert Remidez Jr.
                       jsg0af@mizzou.edu                            herbert@coe.missouri.edu
                 Ran-Young Hong                    So-Yeon Yoon                 Chris Amelung
              rhe06@mizzou.edu               soyeony@yahoo.com              AmelungC@mizzou.edu
                         Dale R. Musser                                  James M. Laffey
                      MusserDa@missouri.edu                           laffeyj@missouri.edu
                        All from the Center for Technology Innovations in Education
                         111 London Hall, College of Education, Univ. of Missouri
                                                 Columbia, MO 65211
                                    **(573) 882-8350 ** Fax (573) 884-5158
                                           http://www.ctie.missouri.edu
ABSTRACT
Shadow netWorkspaceTM (SNS) is a web-based CSCL environment designed and developed specifically to support schools
and learning. SNS has been designed to facilitate the implementation of a learning community, wherein members (teachers,
students, parents, etc.) have tools for representing, organizing, sharing and collaborating on their thoughts and efforts. The
SNS environment may be installed locally for the learning community whether that is a school building, school district or
consortium of teachers or schools collaborating on implementing a cross schools project. SNS is being provided for free,
has an Application Programming Interface (API) so others can develop applications for it, and is open source so that
everyone can participate in enhancing and supporting it. SNS includes tools such as secure login, well-defined user roles
and group types, file system, calendar & task manager, chat & discussion boards, notes & document creator, and homework
notification. The system's strength and potential for longevity lie in its Open Source (GNU Public License) development
model, object and process oriented operating environment, and a robust application programming interface (API). Many
schools (internationally) have downloaded SNS for trials and a number are currently engaged in pilot programs.

Keywords
Collaborative Network Learning, Open Source, Online Operating System, CSCL Infrastructure, netWorkspace

INTRODUCTION
Shadow is an Internet-based workspace designed to support the processes of learning and schooling. A quick and rough
analogy is to imagine the desktop of your computer existing on the Internet. Using a browser, such as Internet Explorer or
Netscape, you connect via a secure login to a SNS web-site and your personal netWorkspace. Here you find a desktop for
accessing your files and applications. (Laffey et al. 2000)
There are many Network Learning Systems (NLS) both in existence and under development. Getting familiar with other
systems can help you to understand SNS. Please refer to sns.internetschools.org in the publications section for a document
entitled Systems Similar to Shadow netWorkspace for up to date NLS comparison information.
SNS is a server-side operating system, designed to be installed and operated within a local school to support an online
learning community. In this way the school or community "owns" the Shadow implementation. They create the rules and
policies, establish membership, add or remove software applications, and make it their own customized implementation.
Ease of implementation and use is key to the success of SNS for school improvement. The hardware requirements for
setting up and running this server will cost schools less than $1000 and most schools may simply designate an older
Pentium-class computer to run the system.
The goal of the Shadow netWorkspace is to increase the capability of the students and teachers in a school/learning
community to gain and process information and build and represent knowledge. A school-centered netWorkspace should
facilitate the creation of artifacts representative of knowledge, and provide simple means to access, share and collaborate
around those artifacts/representations.

EXTENSIBILITY & LONGEVITY
Shadow   optimizes representation of    learning and work   in a networked environment, but is flexible enough    to handle
multiple methods   of collaboration or   learning. The learning/teaching method  needs  to be  a local  decision, allowing
integration into other aspects of the local community. Computer support for methods of learning are expected to evolve as
communities and developers experiment and refine new forms of learning and collaboration.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page     528

Therefore, we believe that it is important that a networked learning system evolve or be customized over time to be "useful"
to the individual or community, rather than be simply a "usable" tool for some function that limits the flexibility for
adaptation by the individual or community.
SNS is being developed as an Open Source project, which means that users will not have to pay to use the system. The
Shadow networkspace operates on a Linux-based server and utilizes the Apache web server, MySQL, and Sendmail (All
free software). The server-side operating system framework, application programming interfaces and core applications are
written in Perl. As Open Source software, SNS is positioned to improve and evolve as more people implement and develop
the system.
Developing sophisticated applications for the WWW is very challenging. There are many code snippets and technical how-
to articles available, but web development is very different from traditional application development. The design of SNS as
an operating system rather than a web-learning application provides a framework that simplifies the development and
deployment of web applications. SNS also provides a secure consistent interface to these applications, with predefined
individual roles and group structures with predefined rules. Thus bringing some of the favorable aspects of traditional
application development to the fingertips of web-based application developers.
To illustrate how a web-based operating system designed to support learning would be useful to a school, consider this
scenario. Lets say there are 10 schools that want to create new online communities and they each have small grants to hire a
programmer to create their web-based environment. All 10 need to create a site where users need to login to the system and
be treated appropriately based on their user type; 9 of the 10 want to have discussion boards; 8 of the 10 want to have chat
rooms; and 7 of the 10 want some sort of file sharing. Each school has a different idea of how they would like to use these
tools once their environment is built, but must wait for months of development before they can even begin to use their
systems  for  implementing   their online  learning strategies. That's hundreds of  hours of wastefully  redundant effort.
Wouldn't it be nice if there was a stable platform to start at? A platform that can provide all the base functionality schools
are looking for and free-up their developers to begin working directly on applications that address pedagogical issues and
learning strategies. Wouldn't it be nice if the platform simplified server-side programming so that developers had a robust
library of system functions to rely on?
Programming a learning application within SNS involves utilizing preexisting system objects and defining new objects and
processes to directly support a specific pedagogy. Discussion Boards and Chat Rooms can be associated with and accessed
via groups. Programming for data input, display, and manipulation can be handled in an object-oriented manner with a rich
set of system resources.

VISION
The vision for SNS includes the development and sharing of new pedagogical content, strategies and custom applications
among the extended SNS community. Each local school or district owns their own community and they actively participate
in the advancement of the global SNS community. As webquests are created in one locale, teachers elsewhere can share
their strategies and applications to support group projects and learning. Currently, educators can share simple webquests via
email, but SNS supports the sharing of full-fledged applications with secure roles and advanced file and data handling.
The idea is to employ two layers of Open-Source development: the first, the NLS, will function as a web-based operating
system full of community support functionality, and the second, the core and custom applications and learning tools, will
operate as processes and exist as content within the NLS to support specific learning and working strategies. The power is
revealed when you consider an Open-Source NLS that supports the development of Open-Source applications that will
operate within the freely and widely available web-browser platform.

REFERENCES
Laffey, J., Musser, D.   &  Espinosa,   L. (2000)   Shadow netWorkspace    Learning Systems   Project. Proceedings of    the
International Workshop    on Advanced      Learning Technologies.  (Palmerstown  North,   New Zealand),   IEEE Computer
Society. pp. 188-189.
