Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  529

  Collaborative Discovering of Key Ideas in Knowledge
                                                     Building
                Teemu Leinonen, Otso Virtanen, Kai Hakkarainen(1), Giedre Kligyte
University of Art and Design Helsinki, (1) University of Helsinki, Finland - teemu.leinonen@uiah.fi

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we describe our work-in-progress for developing Collaborative Discovering Tool (CoDi tool) that is meant
for enhancing knowledge building discourse in the Future Learning Environment 2 (Fle2) system. Knowledge building
discourse in the Fle2 type of systems usually leads to gradual accumulation of notes. We have found that users experience
difficulties to get an overall picture of the knowledge produced and synthesize its advancement. By providing means for the
participants to highlight key ideas, that they find particularly useful, the CoDi tool was designed to facilitate collective
management of knowledge and inquiry and provide various visual representations of the database. We report results of a
pilot experiment carried out with the CoDi prototype that appears to be a promising tool. However there are certain open
questions concerning what are the social and pedagogical effects of highlighting ideas in different educational setting, how
highlighting should be organized so that it would provide strongest support of knowledge advancement, and whether the
results should always be shared not only by tutors but also by students. Regardless of the challenges, the development of
the CoDi tool appears to open up an interesting line of inquiry that we would like to share with the CSCL community.

Keywords:     Knowledge       building environments, shared understanding,  social awareness, design of      CSCL  systems,
information design

KNOWLEDGE BUILDING WITH THE FLE2 SYSTEM
The main aim of computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) environments is to provide students with advanced
computer tools for knowledge production taking place in an interaction between the users (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1993;
1994). In most of the CSCL applications (e.g. CSILE, CoNotes, Belvedere, Knowledge Forum) the knowledge production
happens in a shared working space where students may carry out discussion by writing their notes. The Future Learning
Environment   2 (Fle2), is    a CSCL   environment designed to support collaborative knowledge  building     and progressive
inquiry (http://fle2.uiah.fi, see Leinonen, Raami,   Mielonen, Hakkarainen,  Muukkonen,  1999).  The idea     of progressive
inquiry is to support a  research-like   study process, where  the students themselves generate research     problems, make
hypothesis and search explanatory scientific information as a group (Hakkarainen, 1998; Hakkarainen & Sintonen, in press;
Muukkonen, Hakkarainen, & Lakkala, 1999; Muukkonen, Lakkala, & Hakkarainen, 2001).
The current version of the Fle2's Knowledge Building (KB) module functions as a shared space for asynchronies dialogue
and conferencing. The discussion is constructed around Course Contexts set by the tutor and all notes posted to the database
are labeled with a Category of Inquiry (Problem, Working Theory, Deepening Knowledge, Comment, Meta-comment,
Summary and Help) reflecting a step in process. Currently the knowledge building discussion of the group can be viewed as
a thread or as a list of notes sorted by writer or by category of inquiry (Leinonen 2000). Testing of the Fle2 KB has shown
the following pedagogical usability problems: (1) When the amount of the KB notes increases rapidly they are difficult to
find and locate (knowledge-management challenge), (2) Other participants' activities are difficult to match (awareness
challenge) and (3) the process of progressive inquiry appears for the students more as a linear process than a deepening
circle (deepening-inquiry challenge).
An essential aspect of the Fle2's KB is that all knowledge artifacts (notes) are saved to the database. This way the Fle2 KB
becomes an organizational memory of the group of learners. Effective organizational memory should be able to answer
such questions as "Why did we do this?" and "How did such and such come to be the case?" (Conklin 1993). In the Fle2's
KB a crucial problem is that when the amount of notes grows high investigating back to the history of the knowledge
building process and making overall impression of the database becomes very difficult.
The study was focused on developing a new tool to solve the problems stated above related to the handling of information
flows in a knowledge-building environment, making students more aware of the nature of the progressive inquiry process
and aiming to increase participants awareness of their co-students thinking and the groups collective ideas.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page 530

CODI PROTOTYPE
The Collaborative Discovering of Ideas tool (CoDI tool)
prototype was made for highlighting relevant material in
the knowledge building notes. The students and tutor are
able  to   review   their  individual    highlights  as well  as
group's highlights.
Figure  1  describes   a  user scenario  of  the  CoDi  tool. At
first the    students  are  working    with   the KB    database
according to the model of progressive inquiry by adding
their  own    study    problems,    theories,    and  deepening
knowledge in to the KB database. In some stage the tutor
is introducing the CoDi tool for the students and asking
them   to highlight   the  most   important ideas   (paragraphs)
from   the   notes in  the  KB  database.   After  this the data
related   to the   highlighting   and  the notes  (writer,  data,
category of inquiry, link) are offered as alternative views
of the  content    of the  database.  These  visualizations   can
then be used as a starting point for further discourse.
The experiment with the CoDI tool was carried out withstudentstakingpartinthestudyprojectonDesignforCSCW/LcarriedoutaspartoftheFutureLearningFigure 17: Knowledge Building, highlighting the notesand data provided for the users.
Environment study project organized by the UIAH Media Lab at the University of Art and Design in autumn 2000. The
study   project  lasted   four  months.    More   detailed  description of  the  course and   the class  can  be found  from  the
http://www.euro-cscl.org database.
CONCLUSIONS
The main idea of the CoDi tool is that it offers the user the opportunity to select an interface that he or
she is most comfortable (thread, list, map, etc. views). The CoDI tool gives an interesting possibility to
combine and display many different levels of data at one glance. Users may take different views to the
content of the KB database and use these views for browsing the database as well. The new views
provided by the CoDi tool are: (1) The KB Dartboard view represents spatial relationships between
notes    values    (calculated      from    the   highlightings),   (2)  The    KB   Social   Blocks    view   provides   social
network analyses of the groups activities, and (3) The Key Idea Cluster views of each note showing
what paragraphs each participant has highlight (see Figure 1). The purpose of these views is to help
participants to collectively assess progress of their knowledge building inquiry and navigate across the
database with the help of the key ideas.
The   prototype    described   in this  paper offers  interesting possibilities for students and  teachers to define group's  key
questions and compare them with individual interests. It may also function as a learning process negotiation tool helping to
orient  and   coordinate    individual   activity  in the   group  context, raising  discussions  about other  people's opinions,
encouraging collaboration and possibly supporting reflection of learning and knowledge-building processes. The tool also
helps to solve the problem concerning the representation of the KB-discussion, which should be more spiral in nature as
indicated by the progressive inquiry model (see Hakkarainen, 1998; Muukkonen et. al., 1999). The solution proposed in this
paper appears to be promising in terms of solving the problem of growing number of the knowledge-building notes.
There are still many open questions concerning pedagogical effects of the CoDi tool. We believe, however, that this kind of
a tool or framework for tools would offer good possibilities to further developed Knowledge Building environments in
other systems beside the Fle2 as well.

REFERENCES
Full paper with references is available in the following URL: http://www.uiah.fi/~tleinone/codi/
