Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page   533

           Support for Object-Oriented Model Construction
                                      Jakob Tholander, Klas Karlgren
                                Department of Computer and Systems Sciences
                              Stockholm University/Royal Institute of Technology
                                      jakobth@dsv.su.se, klas@dsv.su.se
ABSTRACT
We discuss a design solution for a learning environment for students of object-oriented modeling. An overall goal in this
work has been to ensure a design that is well grounded both theoretically and empirically. The design of the tools relate to
central issues in  cognitive apprenticeship and  situated learning.  Theoretical and  practical  design  considerations are
presented for each of the learning environment and results from empirical studies are discussed.

THEORY GROUNDED DESIGN
Theories of learning are important for the design of computer based learning environments but these cannot simply be
applied and used in the process of design. (Jonassen & Land, 2000). We describe our design approach for incorporating
cognitive apprenticeship and situated action in the design of a learning environment for computer science students of object
oriented (OO) modeling. The purpose of object-oriented modeling is to create models of an enterprise that can be used for
the subsequent design and construction of supporting communication and information systems. The learning environment
consists of three tools aiming to support cognitive apprenticeship style learning for object oriented modeling (Collins,
Brown, & Newman, 1989). Two of the tools (what we call expert problem solving tracks, and a library of modeling
patterns) support aspects of authentic activity, i.e., an activity that help "students to foresee their participation in activities
that matter beyond school" (Greeno, 1997, p.11). The third tool (a pedagogical assistant) support reflection and meta-
cognition.
Theories that emphasize the situated properties of human action and learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991); (Collins et al., 1989)
are very influential on current understandings of these phenomena and have been extensively used in analyses of learning
(Jordan & Henderson, 1995). In our work we explore this new focus and the conditions it provides for designers of learning
environments. An overall goal work has been to ensure a design that is well grounded both theoretically and empirically
(Land & Hanaffin, 2000). This has led to two important design activities. The first was to explicitly state what aspects of
the theoretical framework that we wanted to support in our design. The second activity came as a consequence of our
theoretical framework  which   emphasizes   learning in so-called   authentic activities. This was  to  conduct studies  on
experienced conceptual modelers in order to get an understanding of how they acted when solving problems. The results of
these studies were used to design particular aspects of the learning environment and in the evaluations of how learners
interacted with the learning environment (Tholander, 2001).
Collins, Brown, & Newman provide a framework (cognitive apprenticeship) that designers of learning environments should
consider (Collins et al., 1989). In our design we have identified the following aspects to be particularly important to
consider in order to promote students to get engaged in the cognitive practices of conceptual modeling. First, learners
should  engage  in authentic problem solving  to develop  skills  that help them  put knowledge    into use. Knowledge   of
concepts and methods must not be learnt as abstract notions, but in a context where the practice of their use is uncovered.
Second, observation of experienced practitioners' problem solving help student to develop their own problem solving
strategies. Third, learners should practice to use experienced modelers' language, concepts, and tools in order to see the
role of these concepts in practice. Fourth, learners should reflect on their own problem solving, and on their use of tools and
concepts in relation to how experienced practitioners use these.

Learning and Doing Object Oriented Modeling
The first three aspects of our design focus above (authentic problem-solving, observing experienced practitioners, tool and
language use) all include aspects of how experienced modelers go about in their problem solving. To be able to design tools
for learners that support these aspects it is essential to ground the design in an understanding of how experienced modelers
reason and carry out tasks. Therefore a think-aloud study with experienced modelers was conducted. The goal of the study
was to find out characteristics about the different ways modelers solve problems in order to understand important elements
of the cognitive practice they work in. The most important findings of the study were (see also (Karlgren, Tholander,
Dahlqvist, & Ramberg, 1998)): First, in the problems experienced modelers face, they tend to identify familiarities with
other problems which they have experienced and use these to solve the current problem, i.e,. they engage in case based
reasoning. Second, they often go back and reflect on the overall nature and goal of the task, i.e., they show a high degree of
meta-cognitive thinking. Third, they discuss with stakeholders how important concepts in the problem domain should be
understood. They do not presuppose certain interpretations of the concepts based on their own ideas. Fourth, they refer to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  534

general problems and solutions that they often face in their everyday practice, i.e. they use analysis patterns (Fowler,
1997). Fifth, they proceed iteratively by solving sub-problems that they move back and forth between because they know
that concepts are very dependent upon each other.
We have designed three tools to support students of object oriented modeling practice. First, expert problem solving tracks
designed to support authentic problem solving (the first learning focus), observation (the second learning focus), and use of
experienced practitioners language, concepts, and tools (the third learning focus). The purpose of this tool is to present
modeling tasks that provide the same kind of problems and complexity which conceptual modelers face in the 'real world'.
Through this tool we want the students to get exposed to scenarios that resemble authentic environments including how
experienced modelers go about to solve complex problems and how they talk about them. Emphasis is on the authentic
practices of experienced modelers and on the language they use.
Second,  library of modeling     patterns designed   to support   authentic problem  solving  and  also use of   experienced
practitioners language, concepts, and tools. One of the goals of the project was that students should learn to create models
at a level of abstraction that makes them reusable in future situations. Our way of supporting learners in this is through
analysis patterns, which are abstractions of common knowledge in object oriented modeling. Our study on experienced
modelers  showed    that these aspects    are often referred to  through  analysis patterns. We   view  analysis patterns as
representations of the language, concepts and tools, which the students should practice to use, not as special constructs that
they should memorize.
Third, the pedagogical assistant provides comments with the purpose to encourage the students to reflect and think critically
(the fourth learning focus). Students should not take their preconceptions about their solutions, their knowledge, and the
problem domain they are modeling for granted. As the students construct their models, the assistant asks questions and
gives critical remarks about why the students have created some particular objects or relations, comments about the way the
student approaches the problem, or gives advice about good ways of approaching such a problem. We have created three
types of comments, first, comments about some particular objects and relations in the model being constructed, second,
about important issues in the enterprise that must be represented in the model, and third, about some general problematic
modeling issues in the solution.
Two studies of students using the learning environment have been conducted. In the studies, students solved modeling
problems with the learning environment for 60 minutes. An important finding was the collaboration that students engaged
in. The tools became mediating artifacts between the students and something to use as support for discussion and to come
up with new solutions from. The learning environment expanded the conceptual apparatus that the students could use to
reason with and helped them to see their solutions from new perspectives.
Summary
In this work we have taken a well-defined theoretical position based on cognitive apprenticeship and situated learning. The
point of this work has been to explicitly design solutions based on these models of learning in order to investigate how such
models can and must be adapted to particular circumstances. The purpose has been to discuss how theoretical and practical
issues have been taken under consideration in our design.

REFERENCES
Collins, A., Brown,  J.  S., &   Newman,   S.  (Eds.).  (1989). Cognitive Apprenticeship:  Teaching the  Crafts  of Reading,
         Writing, and Mathematics. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fowler, M. (1997). Analysis Patterns: Reusable Object Models: Addison Wesley Publishing.
Greeno, J. (1997). On Claims That Answer the Wrong Questions. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5-17.
Jonassen, D., & Land, S. (2000). Theoretical Foundations of Learning Environments: Lawrence Erlbaum Ass.
Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction Analysis: Foundations and Practise. The Journal of the Learning Science,
         4(1), 39-103.
Karlgren, K., Tholander,   J., Dahlqvist,  P.,  & Ramberg,   R.   (1998). Authenticity in Training Systems  for  Conceptual
         Modelers. Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Atlanta, Georgia.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation: Cambridge University Pr.
Tholander, J. (2001). Students interacting through a Cognitive Apprenticeship Learning Environment. Paper presented at
         the Euro CSCL, Mastricht, The Netherlands.
