Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 535

    AudioExplorer: Multiple Linked Representations for
                                                Convergence
                                                     Jochen Rick
                                      College of Computing / GVU Center
                                         Georgia Institute of Technology
                                            jochen.rick@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
The problem   of convergence   is an  important one  for designing   collaborative-learning environments.   Ideally, learning
environments allow novices to work together to achieve convergence of correct understanding, without constant support
from experts. In order to achieve this, software designers need to investigate properties of the environment that support
convergence. One of these properties is multiple linked representations (MLRs). In this paper, I describe AudioExplorer, a
learning environment where students, working in pairs, explore the physics of music. AudioExplorer is remarkable in its
use of many linked representations; thus, it is a good environment to research the role of MLRs in the convergence process.

Keywords
Representation, software design, convergence, audio, inquiry-based learning

CONVERGENCE AND MULTIPLE LINKED REPRESENTATIONS
Jeremy Roschelle proposes that the "crux of collaboration is the problem of convergence (Roschelle, 1996)." Can two (or
more) people working together reach convergence of understanding? Furthermore, is that convergent understanding closer
to real understanding than the members of the group could have reached without collaborating? Roschelle shows that
students (working in pairs) can achieve convergent conceptual change, using the Envisioning Machine (EM) software. EM
is a direct-manipulation graphical simulation of particle dynamics (velocity and acceleration of a particle). Students are
asked to manipulate position, velocity, and acceleration of a particle to match the motion of a simulated ball. Though
students did not converge on everything that scientists know about velocity and acceleration, they did manage to work
together to achieve better understanding. Since a typical classroom environment contains few experts (for the most part, one
teacher) and many novices (students), creating learning environments where collaboration among novices is productive
becomes necessary. So, what features of a learning environment support the convergence process?
MLRs can support the convergence process. In many scientific fields (such as mathematics and chemistry), phenomena can
be looked at from different perspectives. For instance, in mathematics, a two variable relation can be looked at as an
equation, graph, or table (Kaput, 1989). In chemistry, a chemical reaction can be looked at as the physical chemicals, the
underlying reaction equations, the results of spectroscopy, etc. (Kozma et al., 2000). The power of multiple representations
is that they emphasize different aspects of the same system. To understand each representation and how they are linked
together is to understand the domain more completely than any one individual representation.
Both Kaput and Kozma assert that connecting multiple representations in a learning environment should be helpful for
student understanding. This is based on the theory that students should be able to move between different representation
and that each can  inform  the other. In chemistry,  Kozma   finds   that experts move  easily   and often between   different
representations, while novices tend to get fixated on one representation (Kozma, 2001). Offering clear linkages between the
representations should be a way to scaffold novices to go between them. As for convergence, MLRs offer the opportunity
of different ways of exploring the same domain. Since the evidence displayed by the environment is multiple (more than a
single representation), there is a greater chance that useful convergence dialogue will occur.

AUDIOEXPLORER
AudioExplorer  is a computer   environment  to  explore  the physics  of  sound   by examining   the frequency  domain. The
frequency domain    is a transformation  of the  sound   signal into  its frequency  components.   Since   our ear perceives
frequencies, examining the frequency domain is a useful way to understand the properties of music. The system consists of
a music keyboard giving sound input into the computer (Figure 1); the AudioExplorer software displays the signal on the
screen, which can then be analyzed by the students.
AudioExplorer is a tool for inquiry-based learning. The environment gives the users the opportunity to explore the subject
(audio and music) and thereby discover the principles of the subject rather than passively learn about them. Thus, learning
is active and students are encouraged to construct their own meaning.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   536

                                                            First, the student strikes a key on the music keyboard
                                                            (point    1). This  produces   a sound    (point 2).  That
                                                            sound is converted by FFT (Fast Fourier Transform
                                                            algorithm)    to an  instantaneous   frequency   response
                                                            notation (point 3), where sonic energy is indicated by
                                                            length    of   the  line.  The   frequency   response   is
                                                            recorded over time (point 4), energy being indicated
                                                            by darkness. Then, the student can use the analysis
                                                            line to find out the frequency of the harmonics (point
                                                            5);   the students  can   drag the analysis  line up   and
                                                            down by dragging on the spectrum graph to measure
                                                            the   exact   frequencies.  The    calculations  that  the
                                                            software shows (at point 5) convert that frequency to
                                                            the   matching   key and   highlight  it on the  display's
                                                            keyboard (point 6). In the example in Figure 1, the
                                                            fundamental      harmonic   is the   key  that was   stuck
                                                            originally by the student (point 1). Thus, the multiple
                                                            representations come full circle.

Figure 1: AudioExplorer usage set-up with numbers indicating representations
Each representation has different features that allow the users to look at the sound phenomena from different perspectives.
So, each representation has different affordances that allow the user to better examine the domain. Each representation
suppresses some aspects of the domain and emphasizes others, thereby supporting different forms of approaching the
material. Perhaps most importantly, the linking of these representations creates "a whole that is more than the sum of its
parts (Kaput, 1989)."

EVALUATION
In the extended on-line version of this paper, a formative evaluation of AudioExplorer is detailed. Students (working in
pairs) were able to use AudioExplorer to engage the subject. They moved easily between the multiple representations and
were able to understand  the links between  them. MLRs  supported     the  convergence   process.    Significant learning was
achieved with two learners and a supportive learning environment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My thanks go to the volunteers who used AudioExplorer, to Henry Valk who gave me guidance and an opportunity to test
this software on a real audience, to Amy Bruckman's CS7465 class that gave me feedback on the design, to John Maloney
and the Squeak  community    for their programming support, and    to many     who have    given me   insightful feedback  on
AudioExplorer.

REFERENCES
Kaput, J.J. (1989) Linking representations in the symbolic systems of algebra. Research agenda for mathematics education:
        Research issues in the learning and teaching of algebra, edited by S. Wagner & C. Kieran, pp. 167-194.
Kozma, R. (2001) Material and social affordances of multiple representations for science understanding. AERA2001.
Kozma, R., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000). The roles of representations and tools in the chemistry laboratory and
        their implications for chemistry learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9(2), 105-143.
Roschelle, J. (1996) Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging
        paradigm, edited by T. Koschmann, Chapter 9, pp. 209-248.
