Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  538

             StoneSoup: A Contextualized Portfolio System
                                                       Jenny Robins
     Graduate School of Library and Information Science University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
                                                    jrobins@uiuc.edu
ABSTRACT
Teaching   and  learning  are social  interactions that   are impacted   by contextual,   situated factors within  the learning
environment. These factors include the past and present circumstances of the participants, their psychological and social
characteristics, and the physical characteristics of the environment. Contextualized technological systems that take these
factors into account. This paper contrasts contextualized and traditional computing. A description of the StoneSoup digital
portfolio system is provided as an example of a contextualized CSCL application.

Keywords
CSCL, CMC, CSCW, context, situated, contextualize, portfolio, information structures, collaboratory

INTRODUCTION: THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTEXT
Teaching and learning are interpersonal activities that can be viewed as contextually situated. People draw on contextual
understandings   when  making   decisions  about   actions to  take, and in interpreting  the actions  and responses   of others
(Dourish, 2001; Orlikowski, et al., 1995). Context refers to the environment in which interactions between people, or
between people and things, emerge. It is understood in terms of both past and present circumstances. Context refers not
only to physical characteristics, but also to psychological, historical, and social characteristics. It includes tasks to be
accomplished, with their attendant goals, activities, and processes (Engeström, 1990; Nardi, 1996). Context is the stuff
descriptions are made from, having to do with concrete circumstances, not abstractions. For example, from a physical
perspective, K12 schools might seem contextually uniform. School buildings are easily recognized. But, when context is
viewed holistically, schools and their classrooms vary widely and this impacts the type and extent of the adoption of
computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) technology. Improving the fit between technology and its application in
the classroom means designing technologies that are more contextualized. This research addresses contextualized CSCL.

CONTEXTUALIZED SYSTEMS
In a traditional computer   application,  the   system is  designed  with the view   that goal  states exist, and  having  been
predetermined,   procedures   leading to  these states can  be coded   into computer  algorithms.   This has  resulted in  work
practices, organizational practices   and physical environments   that  are designed  around   the functions  of the computing
system.   In effect, computers  order  the  environment,    and  humans   obey   the computers     (Suchman,  1987).  However,
technology can be made to recede into the environmental background, while practices that draw on human skills, physical
abilities and  social practices can   be  fore-grounded.   Computing     systems can  be  made     compatible  with  the  social,
organizational, cultural, physical and temporal activities of the people they serve, i.e. they can be designed to support
contextual factors (Dourish, 2001).
Contextualized design takes advantage of the power of today's computers to create computing systems that emphasize
flexibility over efficiency. Contextualized computing gives users the power to tamper with the system, execute it and
circumvent it. It supports them in applying and adapting the system to the situation at hand (Schmidt & Bannon, 1992). One
way to do this is to build computer systems as toolkits rather than monolithic applications. As opposed to one-size-fits-all
packages, toolkits consist of small, stand-alone components that can be fitted together, as needed, by users through a
bricolage process. Toolkits can also be made extensible, allowing users to add new components as they became available or
remove components for use with other infrastructures. By configuring toolkits, users become co-designers of contextualized
systems, adapting them to specific environments and needs (Dourish & Edwards, 2000). Rather than producing finished
systems, this allows for the development of co-evolving social-technical environments. These bricolage systems enhance
the role of users in computing systems and the role of computers in human systems. Computers can do the things that they
do well, while humans do the things for which they are best suited.
While there is a need for increased flexibility in computing systems, there is a corresponding need for ways to represent that
flexibility to users. One way to address the problem of representation in contextualized, bricolage systems is through the
use of mediating information structures. These are structures that are meaningful to humans, but can also be interpreted by
computers. Information structures organize and direct expectations regarding the presentation of information. Information
structures impact human systems because of the way they are able to mediate between fixed objects, like documents and
software, and flexible social practices (O'Day & Nardi, 2001). An information structure that can play multiple roles in a
bricolage system is a common list. Creating lists is something humans are particularly good at. Processing lists is something
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   539

computers are good at. Thus a list can function as a communication medium between humans and between humans and
computers.

THE STONESOUP DIGITAL PORTFOLIO SYSTEM
StoneSoup portfolio units consist of student answers to a list of questions about their learning processes, activities and
products. The StoneSoup digital portfolio system is a flexible, evolving tool that runs on a browser infrastructure. A digital
portfolio system requires a critical mass of participating school districts in order for student information to be broadly
available. However the learning objectives of school districts vary widely. Therefore, the system must simultaneously
support the needs of numerous participating districts. At the same time, portfolios must be uniform enough to be processed
across districts. Using StoneSoup, school administrators can adapt the question list so that it meets their learning objectives.
Teachers have control over which questions are assigned to students and how long student answers need to be. However,
the list remains  consistent because,  in all instances, StoneSoup   uses a  simple two-dimensional      information  structure.
Portfolio questions can be answered using pencil and paper. But if the answers are input through an HTML form, they are
stored as XML units on a school's local server. Answers can then be retrieved as HTML documents. These documents have
a header that is customized for the school district, and answers are displayed using a standardized format. A centralized
index to the XML units links student portfolios in all participating school districts, making them available when students
transfer to new   schools. Student units  can  be text-mined  for resources   and  activities related to lessons   units, giving
StoneSoup a secondary role as an educational collaboratory. Visit StoneSoup at: http://www.stonesoop.org.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The  information  structure  used in this portfolio  is derived from  an  information    structure used  by  the Inquiry   Page:
http://inquiry.uiuc.edu, a project directed by Chip Bruce. This work was supported by the Graduate School of Library and
Information Science at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.

REFERENCES
Dourish, Paul (2001). Seeking a Foundation for Context-Aware Computing. Human-Computer Interaction, 16,2-3.
Dourish, Paul & Edwards, Keith (2000). A tale of two toolkits: Relating infrastructure and use in flexible CSCW toolkits.
         Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, 9, 1, 33-51.
Engeström,   Yrjö  (1990).  When  is a  tool? Multiple   meanings of  artifacts in human    activity. In Y.   Engeström,   (Ed.)
         Learning, Working and Imagining, (pp.171-195). Orienta-Konsutit, Helsinki.
Nardi,   Bonnie A. (1996).   Chapter 4: Studying  context:  A   comparison   of activity theory,   situated action models,  and
         distributed cognition.. Context and Consciousness: Activity Theory and Human-Computer Interaction (pp. 7-15).
         MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
O'Day,   V. &   Nardi, B.A.  (2001). An   ecological perspective  on digital libraries.  In A. Bishop,   N.  Van   House,  & B.
         Buttenfeld (Eds.).Digital Library Use: Social Practice in Design and Evaluation. Cambridge:MIT Press.
Orlikowski, W.J., Yates, JoAnn, Okamura, Kazuo & Fujimoto, Masayo (1995). Shaping electronic communication: The
         metastructuring of technology in the context of use. Organizaton Science, 6, 4, 423-444.
Schmidt,  Kjeld  & Bannon,   Liam  (1992).  Taking   CSCW    seriously: Supporting  articulation   work. Computer    Supported
         Cooperative Work, 1, 1-2, 7-40.
Suchman,    Lucy  (1987).  Plans  and  Situated Actions:   The  problems   of   human-machine      communication.   Cambridge
         University Press, Cambridge.
