Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   546

       Using Pedagogical Agents to Support Collaborative
                                         Distance Learning
        Patrícia Jaques*        Adja Andrade**             João Jung*           Rafael Bordini*      Rosa Vicari*
                          * PPGC, ** PGIE ­ Federal Uiversity of Rio Grande do Sul
                        {pjaques, jjung, bordini, rosa}@inf.ufrgs.br, adja@inf.pucrs.br
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we describe an animated pedagogical agent which assists the interaction among students in a virtual class
within a collaborative communication tool, either on-line or not, motivating them, correcting wrong concepts and providing
new knowledge. This guiding agent we call Collaboration Agent will consider not only cognitive capabilities of students,
but also social and affective characteristics, which becomes a more qualitative mechanism for collaboration among students
and learning.  The   considered agent is being   modelled     as part of    the multi-agent architecture    of the project "A
Computational Model of Distance Learning Based on Socio-Cultural Pedagogical Approaches".

Keywords
Pedagogical Agents, Dialogue Analysis, Communication Tools

INTRODUCTION
To support the interaction among students, collaborative systems provide tools that facilitate online interaction, such as
chat, bulletin board and discussion lists. These software are good mechanisms for conversation among students, but they do
not provide any guidance or direction for the student during or after the dialogue sessions (Soller, 2001).
The agent considered in this work, called Collaboration Agent, is being modelled as part of the multi-agent architecture of
the project "A Computational Model of Distance Learning Based on Socio-Cultural Pedagogical Approaches" (Andrade et
al., 2001).

DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
The architecture  of the  system  consists of  four     types of artificial agents ­  Diagnostic  Agent,    Mediating  Agent,
Collaboration Agent and Semiotic Agent ­ and human agents (students and tutors). Further details about the system can be
found in (Andrade et al., 2001). The tutoring system may function as an individual tutor, where the Mediating Agent
presents pedagogical contents to the student in accordance to his/her profile and cognitive style, or as a facilitating system
of collaboration, where the Collaboration Agent monitor and mediate the interaction among the students with collaborative
tools.
In this article, we will focus on the system as a collaborative tool. In this case, the Collaboration Agent has an important
role. Its function is to promote and to mediate the interaction between groups of students using collaborative tools (e.g.,
chat, discussion list, and bulletin board). In that way, it supports the students during the interactions, stimulating them when
they appear unmotivated, presenting new concepts and correcting wrong conceptions. In the next section, we describe the
functionalities of the system as a collaborative tool.
We can better understand the implementation of this environment through a scenario. Let us imagine a student, using
his/her computer (at home or at work), connected to this system through the Internet. A Mediating Agent will be sent to the
user's machine  and  it will monitor  his/her activities.  The   Diagnostic  Agent  will suggest to the  Mediating    Agent  a
pedagogical tactic and the contents to be presented based on the inferences on the student model. The Mediating Agent will
request the contents to the Semiotic Agent, which will show it to the student.
When a Diagnostic Agent verify that there is a gap between a student's actual and potential learning, so that it is necessary
the intervention of some facilitators (i.e., other more capable colleagues and/or tutors), it will make a request to the Social
Agent. Then, the Social Agent creates a Collaboration Agent that will invite the students to participate on an interactive
session through a collaborative tool. The Collaboration Agent will monitor the discussions among the students intervening,
when necessary, as mentioned above. It will connect itself to the chosen collaborative tool, as if it were a normal user of the
tool, which gives the Collaboration Agent greater realism.

COLLABORATION AGENT IMPLEMENTATION
Due to its social function ­ to communicate with students, to promote and monitor the interaction among students ­ it
would be interesting for the Collaboration Agent to have an interface that would allow it to exploit students' social nature.
In fact, one of our main concerns is to better exploit the social potential of the students to improve their learning, and
studies demonstrate that people interacting with animated characters learn to interact with other humans (Huard, 1998).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  547

Therefore, we chose to represent it as an animated character who has a personality and which interacts with the student
through messages in natural language.
Thus, as in human social interactions, the Collaboration Agent must be able to and show and perceive emotional responses.
Learning is a comprehensive process which does not simply consists of the transmission and learning of contents. A tutor
(in this case, the Collaboration Agent) must promote the student's emotional and affective development, enhancing his/her
self-confidence and a positive mood, ideal to learning. The way in which emotional disturbances affect mental life has been
discussed in the literature (Goleman, 1995). He recalls the well-known idea that depressed, bad-humoured and anxious
students find greater difficulty in learning.
In order to interact with the student in an adequate way, the agent has to correctly interpret his/her emotions. Therefore, it is
necessary for Collaboration Agent to have not only a student cognitive model, but also an affective one. We are going to
use the student model proposed by (Bercht et al., 1999), which considers the affective states such as effort, self-confidence
and independence.
In collaborative learning, the group is an active entity; therefore, the system must contain information that refers to the
group as a whole. This information generates a group model, which is built and maintained by the Collaboration Agent. The
Collaboration Agent    can build the  group     model from the    individual student  models, which  are obtained  from  the
interactions between the students and their Mediating Agents, and updated by the Diagnostic Agents. The group model can
also be obtained from the observation of the group as a whole.
Still, it is necessary to have in mind the responsibility about the use of affective agent architecture for interaction with the
user, especially in the education. Often we observe that agents have attitudes that are not suitable to students' mood (e.g., if
an agent gets sad when the student could not carry out an exercise). This kind of attitude may generate a disturbed reaction
in the student, making him/her more anxious and less self-confident. It is necessary to identify which behaviours are
appropriate to promote a mood in the student that provides better learning conditions.
The Collaboration Agent will carry out the analysis of the student's dialogue based on statistical methods, such as pattern
matching, message   categorisation and information     retrieval (Soller, 2001). The  messages will  be generated in natural
language, using dialogue models and frames. We intend to base this analysis on the work in (Jaques & Oliveira, 1999)
(Jaques et al., 2000).
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This research is currently in the phase of implementation design and specification. The phase of study of the pedagogical
architecture and computational modelling is concluded. This work is the result of a research project in the area of Artificial
Intelligence applied to Education that intends to create a computational framework (in which the pedagogical agents are
part of it) to support collaborative learning.
REFERENCES
Andrade, A. F.; Jaques, P. A.; Vicari, R. M.; Bordini, R.; Jung, J. (2001) A Computational Model of Distance Learning
        Based on Vygotsky's Socio-Cultural Approach. Proceedings of the MABLE Workshop, AI-ED.
Bercht, M.; Moissa, H.; Viccari, R.M. (1999) Identificação de fatores motivacionais e afetivos em um ambiente de ensino e
        aprendizagem. Proceddings of SBIE'99 (Curitiba, November 23-25) (Poster).
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional Intelligence. Objetiva, 19995.
Huard, R (1998). Character Mastery with the Improvisational Puppets Program. Technical Report (KSL-98-11) ­ Stanford
        University.
Jaques, P.; Andrade,   A.; Moraes, M.; Móra,      M. C (2000).   Uma  Arquitetura  de Agente  para a Análise Qualitativa da
        Interação em Ambientes de Educação a Distância. Proceedings of SBIA (Maceió, November).
Jaques, P.; Oliveira, F. M. (1999) Software Agents for Analysis of Collaboration in a Virtual Classroom. Proceedings of
        AI-ED99 (Le mans).
Soller, A. (2001) Supporting Social Interaction in an Intelligent Collaborative Learning System. IJAIE, 11.
