Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page    548

               Networked PDAs in a Community of Learners
                        Knut Lundby, Ole Smørdal, Anniken Larsen, Annita Fjuk
                                   InterMedia, University of Oslo, Telenor R&D
                                          knut.lundby@intermedia.uio.no
ABSTRACT
'Knowledge access in distributed training. Mobile opportunities for medical students' ('KNOWMOBILE') is exploring just-
in-time functionality with Internet based educational resources on personal digital assistants (PDAs). Intended for life long
learning in a variety of health professions, this specific project concentrates on medical students during their assignment to
the primary health care sector. The project is conducting experiments in the fall 2001 focusing how students in face-to-face
as well as in distributed communities of learners, use the net to access and apply relevant knowledge sources and build
collaborative    support     structures   for   their     training      practice.   The      project   is     reported    on
http://www.intermedia.uio.no/prosjekter/knowmobile

KEYWORDS
Net-based learning, Communities of practice, Mobile terminals, Collaborative portal, Medical students

INTRODUCTION
KNOWMOBILE is an exploratory research and development project. The case is the tenth semester of the new curriculum
in the medical   school at the University of  Oslo, when  the students    are on  assignment at local hospitals and general
practitioners offices in Southern Norway. The project focuses on how the dispersed learners, in a variety of local contexts,
use mobile handheld equipment to access the net for relevant medical knowledge and information. The use of networked
PDAs is understood and researched in relation to and as part of collaborative learning activities. The learning communities
are emphasized, with a focus on how PDAs could offer access.

MIX MODE COMPUTER SUPPORT FOR COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
Networked computers facilitate distributed learning, which includes the mediation of learning activities by a constellation
of various tools and signs with appropriate pedagogical approaches to collaboration and social interactions. These tools and
signs  include Internet  services, Web-based   groupware,    multimedia    shared   spaces,  videoconferencing  technology,
interactive 3D applications on the one hand, and text processing programs, drawing and painting programs, spreadsheet
applications  on the other.  They  shape  and  mediate  the  goals    and courses  of actions,  increasingly taken place   in
collaboratively based learning environments. Thus it is important to derive a framework for design from a rich theoretical
basis, in order to address various issues and aspects that are important for designing tools and signs that will be useful when
introduced in collaborative learning (Fjuk & Smørdal, 2001).

Understanding interaction and collaboration patterns for various net-based learning environments is important in order to
use these patterns explicitly in the pedagogical and technical design (Krange et. al., forthcoming). We regard it particularly
interesting to combine the use of web and mobile terminals. Development, introduction and engagement in net-based
learning activities implies that pedagogical, technological and organizational aspects must be considered a systemic whole.
We regard it a goal to contribute to design and implementation of a net-based community of practice, where the students
may critically reflect and discuss experiences from their practice.

NET-BASED COMMUNITIES OF PRACTICE
The medical students in this case study are subjected to a work-oriented assignment to the primary health care sector. This
implies that students' own experience and problems in their practice should be the main motivation for participation and
engagement in the net-based community of practice they relate to. When students and their tutors in cooperation establish a
social and net-based community of practice, tutor supported reflections and discussions are possible. According to the
literature (Salomon, 1993; Dirckinck-Holmfeld, 1995), successful learning processes in net-based environments are both
contributed to and dependent on a series of elements:

    ·   The actors are genuinely interdependent in order to reach their goals.
    ·   They have an individual responsibility for a collective product, the collective process and their own learning.
    ·   The actors must develop a collective product by means of argumentation and negotiation.
However, these elements are not trivial to support by means of text-based and asynchronous communication facilities (such
as email and web-based groupware).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page   549

EXPERIMENTS IN LOCAL CONTEXTS
The medical students have their assignments in a local hospital for six weeks, then at a general practitioners office for an
additional six weeks. All students are part of a distributed group solving two problem-based projects together, using a web-
based learning environment. In addition, students are co-located with respect to their hospital, and some share apartment
during their assignment. The medical students are offered PDAs (HP Jornadas) with standard software, such as a note-taker,
an audio-recorder, email client, and online and offline browsers. We have selected three local contexts for introducing the
mobile PDAs. This is for comparing and contrasting user experiences in various communities of practice:

Co-located Community of Learners
Five students co-located to a hospital and sharing an apartment are functioning as a learning community, e.g. discussing
their day-to-day experiences over breakfast and dinner. We have introduced networked mobile terminals and IP-zones
(wireless access to Internet plus a collective medical portal) where they work and live. This is to facilitate communication
within the community of learners, using a high-speed network and always-connected mobile terminals.

Partially Co-located Community of Learners
Five students partly co-located during their assignments, but travelling back to their usual homes. We have introduced
mobile terminals for them with GPRS access to the Internet. This is to facilitate communication within a community of
learners regardless of location, e.g. from their homes.

Distributed Community of Learners
Eight distributed students, participating in a project group. The group is put together in order to solve two problem-based
tasks requiring discussions, hypothesis generation and assessing net-based learning resources. We have introduced mobile
terminals that  must be  synchronized   with  a  desktop    computer. This   is to investigate their combined   support for
communication in a distributed learning community.

PROJECT PARTNERS
KNOWMOBILE is a project under Nordunet 2, an Internet research program financed by the Nordic Council of Ministers
and by the Nordic Governments. Project partners are the Faculty of Medicine, Department of Informatics and InterMedia,
University of Oslo, Telenor R&D, Ericsson, Hewlett-Packard and Umeå University. A reference process with medical
schools in other Nordic countries is part of the project.

REFERENCES
[1] Fjuk, A and Smørdal, O (2001) Networked Computers' Incorporated Role in Collaborative Learning. In Euro CSCL
    2001, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
[2] Krange, I., Larsen,  A., Ludvigsen,   S. and Fjuk,     A. (forthcoming) Describing construction  of knowledge  through
    identification of collaboration patterns in 3D learning environments. Accepted to CSCL 2002.
[3] Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L. (1995) Project Pedagogy as the Foundation for Computer Supported Collaborative Learning.
    In: Collis, B & G. Davies. (Eds), (1995) Innovative adult learning with innovative technologies. IFIP Trancelations A-
    61, North-Holland.
[4] Salomon,   G. (1993) No  distribution without individuals'   cognition: a dynamic  interactional view. In: Salomon,  G.
    (Ed.). Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations. Cambridge University Press, New York.
