Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 550

                              NetWorked Learning Systems
 Herbert Remidez, Joshua S. Gottdenker, James M. Laffey, Dale R. Musser, Ran-Young Hong,
                                 Linda Espinosa, Christopher J. Amelung
    herbert@coe.missouri.edu, jsg0af@mizzou.edu, laffeyj@missouri.edu, musserda@missouri.edu,
                  rhe06@mizzou.edu, espinosal@missouri.edu, chrisa@coe.missouri.edu
           Center for Technology Innovations in Education, University of Missouri-Columbia
ABSTRACT
New   network-based  learning systems  are coming    into use  that offer the possibility of integrating curriculum  support
systems with student information systems as well as changing the metaphor of the Internet from library to workspace. We
call these integrated and process-oriented systems Networked Learning Systems (NLS). An NLS is tentatively defined as a
program or set of programs designed to operate over a network and support users as they undertake tasks or participate in
processes related to learning. Computer Supported Collaborated Learning (CSCL) is one important type of process that can
be enabled by NLS. Schools already have begun to adopt NLS. To adequately support CSCL in schools, it is necessary to
understand the types and dimensions of networked learning systems currently available. This poster describes in detail one
networked learning system, Shadow netWorkspaceTM (SNS) (http://sns.internetschools.org), and highlights several other
available networked learning systems.

Keywords
Networked Learning Systems, Shadow netWorkspace

INTRODUCTION
New   network-based  learning systems  (NLS)  offer   the  possibility of  integrating curriculum   experiences and  student
information systems as well as changing the metaphor of the Internet from library to workspace. Shadow netWorkspaceTM
(SNS) (http://sns.internetschools.org) is an NLS being developed by the Center for Technology Innovations in Education at
the University of Missouri-Columbia (http://www.ctie.missouri.edu). SNS was designed to facilitate the implementation of
a learning community, wherein members (teachers, students, parents, etc.) have tools for representing, organizing, sharing,
and collaborating on their thoughts   and  efforts. Much  like a personal   computer's    desktop, SNS   provides a personal
workspace for organizing, storing, and accessing files and an environment for running applications. SNS also provides the
ability to create groups, and for each group to have a "group desktop" for file sharing, communication, and collaboration.
These features help SNS become both an information space for organizing, storing, and accessing files and a social space in
that SNS users have roles (e.g., teachers, students, parents, etc.) that structure the system interaction and are part of groups
that share, communicate, and collaborate. Because SNS is web-based, teachers and students can access their workspaces
from any computer that can access the World Wide Web, and partners (parents or mentors) who are unable to participate in
schools because of time or distance can participate in the Internet-based workspace.
SNS is freely available to all users. It can be installed locally for a learning community, in a school building, school district,
or consortium of teachers or schools collaborating to implement cross-school projects. It comes with an Open Source
License (GNU Public License) and an Application Programming Interface (API) so others can develop applications for it
and participate in enhancing and supporting it. Systems like SNS are somewhat primitive instances of the environments we
envision for schools as learning organizations. These systems must advance through evolutionary and learning processes of
their own.

RELATED NETWORKED LEARNING SYSTEMS
       Blackboard (www.blackboard.com) offers several proprietary software packages to support course delivery, portal
        services, and transaction processing. Blackboard, WebCT (www.webct.com), and eCollege (www.ecollege.com)
        are the three most popular networked learning systems currently in use by schools.
       Mimer Desk (www.mimerdesk.org) is an Open-Source groupware environment designed for a wide variety of uses
        such as web-based learning, project collaboration, and community support.
       SchoolMation (www.schoolmation.com) is a web-based school management system that is very management-
        oriented. It contains a nice grade book and course/assignment organization functions, and is freely available under
        an Open Source license.
       Authenticated User Community (AUC) (http://auc.sourceforge.net/) is an intranet system designed for use in a K-
        12 setting. AUC offers file transfer, email, class calendars, discussion boards, and much more. It is also freely
        available under an Open Source license.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page     551

       ILIAS (http://www.ilias.uni-koeln.de/ios/index-e.html) is a web-based training platform jointly developed by the
         University of Cologne, the Faculty of Economics, Business Administration and Social Sciences at the University of
         Cologne, the Sal. Oppenheim Foundation, and the Department of Education Science and Research of the State of
         Northrhine-Westphalia.

SUMMARY
New   network-based   learning systems  are coming  into use that offer the possibility of integrating  curriculum  support
systems with student information systems as well as changing the metaphor of the Internet from library to workspace. We
call these integrated and process oriented systems Networked Learning Systems. CSCL is one important type of process
that can be enabled by NLS. Schools already have begun to adopt NLS. To adequately support CSCL in schools, it is
necessary to understand the types and dimensions of networked learning systems currently available. This poster describes
one networked   learning system,  Shadow    netWorkspaceTM   (SNS) (http://sns.internetschools.org), and highlights several
other available networked learning systems.

REFERENCES
Laffey, J., Musser, D.   & Espinosa,   L. (2000) Shadow   netWorkspace   Learning Systems    Project.  Proceedings   of the
International Workshop   on    Advanced   Learning Technologies.  (Palmerstown  North,   New  Zealand),   IEEE  Computer
Society. pp. 188-189.
