Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 554

 Text Forum Features for Small Group Discussions with
                                Facet-Based Pedagogy
Steven Tanimoto1, Adam Carlson1, Justin Husted2, Earl Hunt1,Josef Larsson1, David Madigan3,
                                                     Jim Minstrell4
              1University of Washington, 2Amazon.com, 3Rutgers University, 4Talaria Inc.
            tanimoto@u.washington.edu, carlson@cs.washington.edu, elladan@eskimo.com,
           ehunt@u.washington.edu, jlarsson@cs.washington.edu, madigan@stat.rutgers.edu,
                                             jimminstrell@talariainc.com
ABSTRACT
We describe an approach to teaching that engages students in small-group discussions of conceptual material. Then we
describe software that mediates the discussions with an online textual newsgroup-like system that has special features to
support a pedagogical approach that deals explicitly with student preconceptions. Our system, called INFACT-FORUM, is
part of a larger CSCL system called INFACT that supports student discussion, computer-assisted assessment, display of
student progress data, and support for pedagogical intervention.

Keywords
facet, misconception, learning, collaborative, software, CSCL, assessment, text, conferencing, group discussion, mark-up,
annotation, visibility, hide, concept, newsgroup, writing, pedagogy.

INTRODUCTION
In a recent report recommending methods for improving student learning (NRC 1999), recognizing student preconceptions
and using them to engage the students is given a high priority. A particular methodology for discovering and working from
students' preconceptions is sometimes called "facets" of understanding. A facet is a particular conception, often naïve or
limited in its consideration of the relevant factors or phenomena, and it can be considered as an approximate understanding
of some concept (Minstrell, 1992). The question arises as to how best to diagnose student facets. One method is to use a
series of questions with    multiple-choice answers. The DIAGNOSER       project takes this approach (Hunt and Minstrell,
1994). It has the advantage that questions can be designed to get directly at student facets within a relatively short time.
Furthermore, the reliability of the diagnoses can be high. One drawback of the multiple-choice approach, however, is that
some students do not like the traditional, test-like format. Furthermore, students are not involved in collaborative learning
(see, e.g., Scardamalia and Bereiter, 1996) while they are responding to the questions. An alternative approach to eliciting
and diagnosing facets involves the students in focused, small-group discussions, and uses their expressions in that context
as the basis for diagnosis.

THE INFACT TEACHING CYCLE
In Figure 1 is shown a process diagram of the teaching cycle when using the INFACT approach. The first event in the cycle
is the posting, by the instructor, of a challenge question for consideration by the students. Students are given approximately
24 hours to make individual responses to the question. These responses are only visible to the instructor(s) and their authors
until the "curtain" is raised to make them visible within their particular groups. Group discussion proceeds until day 5,
when each group is required to post a consensus answer to the original challenge with either an agreed upon single answer
or a synthesis of remaining differences. Diagnosis by the instructor(s) can begin as soon as individual posts are available,
and continues until enough assessment data is available upon which to safely base interventions appropriate to each student.
The diagnosis process itself may be interactive, if the teacher chooses, so that the teacher may request clarification from a
student before entering a facet diagnosis in the database. The teacher may also wish to email each student as a method of
acknowledgement of the student's efforts in the discussion. The email message itself could contain suggestions for the
individual student. The next step in the general process is for the teacher to identify general trends in the groups or class as
a whole by requesting visualizations of the facet assessment data just collected. These trends would typically suggest
particular teaching interventions to an experienced instructor. The instructor then implements the interventions, which
might consist of any of the following: joining in on group discussions and posting suggestions or leading questions;
offering a link to some web-based resource; or making adjustments to the memberships of the groups.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                       page 555

        Teacher 's           Individual             Group               Teacher 's            V isual -              Interven-
         challenge              posts             discussion               facet               ization                  tion
         question                                                       diagnoses

                                                  Question s            Student s'           C o rrectio n s
                                                  to student s          response s               to
                                                  via email                                  diagnose s

         Figure 1.    The   IN FA CT    pedagogical   cycle.    The  period    of  the cycle is norm ally       1  week.

If additional time   is available, there   could be  additional   subcycles    of  group discussion,    diagnosis,     and intervention.
However, in practice, there is seldom time for much iteration on that level.
The INFACT approach to assessment poses several challenges not faced by the multiple-choice questionnaire method of
DIAGNOSER.        The first  of these  is the necessity   of   structuring the   small-group discussions        so that there  is a high
probability that students will reveal their facets as they participate. The second of these is the challenge of making accurate
diagnoses efficiently from the students' writing. This short paper is concerned primarily with the former and how the
software itself can help structure the discussions.

INFACT-FORUM
In order to best support our teaching process, we decided to implement a custom textual conferencing facility. As a part of
the INFACT suite of tools (Tanimoto et al, 2000), we call this INFACT-FORUM. Its features can be grouped as follows:
(a) user account administration, (b) messaging, (c) visibility control, (d) support for annotation and assessment. Perhaps the
most  unique  features   of  INFACT-FORUM        are  its controls,  available    to administrators,    for   the  visibility of  student
messages. While it is common in text-conferencing systems to provide moderators with ways to delete or hide offensive or
off-topic messages, INFACT-FORUM, as a system to support diagnosis of individual student preconceptions, allows an
administrator to make student responses to the teacher's questions hidden from other students, either indefinitely or until a
particular time. We refer to this feature as "the curtain," because unhiding a student's message is like raising the curtain on a
stage to reveal something anticipated. The teacher raises the curtain to begin the group discussion phase of the cycle. For
simply censoring, there is a facility for an administrator to hide a message from all users, without upsetting the thread
structure in any way. Keeping the curtain lowered for the first phase of a discussion helps to keep each student's initial
response to   the  challenge question   an individual response    rather   than  a response  informed        by peers.  This  provides a
mechanism by which to engage every student in the discussion by forcing them to commit to an interpretation or possible
solution before benefit of group ideas. The possibility of later raising the curtain permits all students to then share their
personal views of the challenge without having to retype it or re-express it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to the National Science Foundation for partial support of this project under Grant CDA-9616532. Thanks also to
other INFACT project contributors, including David Akers, Johann Ammerlahn, Nick Benson, Jeremy Baer, Jeff Phillips,
Shirley Gaw, Jennifer Wright, Virginia Stimpson, and Andrew Schafner.

REFERENCES
For a more detailed description of INFACT-FORUM and more references, see the web-based version of this paper.
Hunt, E., and Minstrell, J. (1994). A cognitive approach to the teaching of physics. In McGilly, K. (ed.), Classroom
         Lessons. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.51-74.
NRC (1999). How People Learn: Bridging Research and Practice. Nat. Res. Council. Wash., DC: Nat. Acad. Press.
Scardamalia, M., and Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. In T. Koschmann (ed.),
         CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tanimoto, S., Carlson, A., Hunt, E., Madigan, D., and Minstrell, J. (2000). Computer support for unobtrusive assessment of
         conceptual knowledge as evidenced by newsgroup postings. ED-MEDIA 2000, Montreal.
