Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page    556

   Elementary Students' Perceptions of Social Networks:
     Development, Experience, and Equity in Collaborative
                                     Software Design Activities
                                                        Yasmin B. Kafai
       Graduate School of Education & Information Studies, University of California, Los Angeles
                                                     kafai@gseis.ucla.edu
ABSTRACT
More recently, the analysis of social networks in computer-supported collaborative learning environments has received
more attention. Less attention has been given to how the participants themselves see collaborative patterns and trends.
Towards that end, we interviewed 131 fourth and fifth-grade elementary students at the end of four different ten week-long
collaborative software design projects and asked them to describe the type of help they had either given to or received from
team members and other students in their class. Technical help with programming problems was by far the most prominent
type of help given or received. The frequency of helping interactions not only increased over the course of two design
projects but also became more varied. Distribution of helping interactions became only more equitable in a second design
project. The discussion addresses methodological issues in using students' perceptions of helping interactions in social
network  analysis, the  nature  of   students'   social resources, the   impact of experience,   and   issues of  gender   equity in
computer-supported collaborative learning.

Keywords
Social network, learning through design, interview analysis, helping interactions, gender differences

INTRODUCTION
Researchers such as Lave and Wenger (1991) see collaborations in apprenticeships as a form of legitimate peripheral
participation that allow participants' enculturation into the social practices of a community. Others, such as Moll and
Greenberg (1990), focus on social resources within the larger community and talk about the importance of mobilizing
`funds of knowledge'    within    a  classroom   for learning. Helping    interactions between   members  have    been   seen  as an
instrumental aspects of a community of learners (e.g., Webb & Palincsar, 1996). Many project-based learning environments
have made helping interactions an integral feature of their design in the form of getting students to explain and share their
understanding  (e.g., Blumenfeld,     Marx,  Soloway,    Krajcik,  Guzdial,   & Palincsar,   1991). The  present   study   builds on
research that  analyzed  helping     interaction patterns in   students'  apprenticeships (Ching   2000)  and  complements     it by
focusing on students' perceptions of these helping interactions in their teams and class during a collaborative software
design project  (Kafai, 1996).    It contributes  to research  on  social  networks   found  in computer-supported    collaborative
learning environments   with the     goal to examine    not only   individual  contributions but  also relationships  among    peers
(Nurmela, Lehtinen, & Palonen, 1999; Palonen & Hakkarainen, 2000).
For that purpose, we asked elementary students in interviews conducted at the end of ten weeklong collaborative software
design projects to describe the type of help they had either given to or received from project team members and other
students in their class. Students, working in mixed-gender teams, developed their own research questions and implementing
instructional software designs as answers. To facilitate helping interactions, student teams were comprised of more or less
experienced students. For that purpose we distinguish in accordance with Lave and Wenger (1991) between students as old-
timers, i.e., having participated in a previous software design project, and newcomers, i.e., being new to instructional
software design activities. This approach resembles models of cognitive apprenticeship (Collins, Brown & Newman, 1989)
with the  important   distinction that not   adults  but  students with   previous experience   are configured    as the more    able
participants. We  used  the interviews    to develop    social network    diagrams (Frank,   1998;  Wordham,   1999)    to visualize
participation patterns and relationships between class members. Our analyses included four classes: two parallel classes in
the first year (one class had teams with old-timers and newcomers; the other class only newcomers), and two consecutive
classes in the second year with teams of old-timers and newcomers--all taught by the same science teacher. In this context,
we followed   fifteen students from    being   newcomers    in the  first year to  becoming  old-timers  in   the second   year.  We
examined  several  aspects: (1)   in  which  ways    students  described  the  social resources available in  form   of  other class
members, newcomers and old-timers alike, (2) how such social networks develop over time within a classroom community
over the course of two consecutive projects, (3) the perspective of students who transitioned from newcomers to old-timers
within the project, and (4) the distribution of helping interactions within classes.
Our results indicate that help with programming problems was by far the most prominent type of help given or received.
According to students' reports, the frequency of helping interactions not only increased over the course of two design
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  557

projects but also became more varied including technical, science and design help. Distribution of helping interactions
became only more equitable in the second design project.
In contrast to previous studies, this research was based on spontaneously generated reports of helping interactions by
participants rather than observational data or logfile analysis. A comparative observational analysis conducted by Ching
(2000) identified different forms of helping interactions around programming issues and confirms that students' perception
of helping interactions seem to carry reasonable validity. The positive aspect of the old-timers' presence in teams came in
form  of help   with programming   problems. Old-timers   also  modeled   helping  interactions         for newcomers   who    are
prospective old-timers. The most promising finding appears in the second design project in the same academic year, when
not only old-timers  but also newcomers  were more  experienced    in  project work. Our findings           also indicated gender
differences in receiving and requesting help. Even in the longitudinal study of old-timer boys and girls we found these
gender differences. However, our analysis of programming tests revealed no significant gender differences: old-timer girls
are as proficient as old-timer boys in programming are. When we examined the outside helping reports, we found that boys
and girls were equally frequent in the position of `class experts'. It is possible that larger social forces are at play here. For
example, it is known that boys tend to play in larger groups than girls do. One could speculate that boys tended to view
other boys within their teams and outside of their teams as part of their expanded social network whereas girls tended to
limit themselves to within team helping. It is also possible that girls see helping interactions more as `common practice' and
consequently  tend to underreport them. Whatever the   explanation, it is perplexing to find that           gender differences are
eradicated in programming proficiency but still replicated in helping structures. While this points to success on some levels,
it also indicates that creating equitable learning environments is not just a matter of skill equality.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by an Early Career Award from the National Science Foundation. I would like to thank the
teacher, Cathleen Galas, and her elementary students at the UCLA Corinne Seeds Elementary School for their participation
in the Learning Science by Design research project over the past five years. Cynthia Ching and Kate Muir participated in
conducting the interviews; Kate Muir, Meredith Roberts, Van Phan and Melissa Cantu assisted in transcribing and coding
the interviews.

REFERENCES
Ching, C. C. (2000). Apprenticeship, learning, and technology: Children as oldtimers and newcomers in the culture of
         learning through design. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S. , & Newman, D. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing and
         mathematics. In L. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-
         494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Frank, K. A. (1998). Quantitative methods for studying social context in multilevels and through interpersonal relations.
         Review of Research in Education, 23, 170-216.
Kafai, Y. B. (1996). Learning science by design. Proposal to the National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.
Moll, L.C., & Greenberg, J. B. (1990). Creating zones of possibilities: Combining social contexts for instruction. In L. C.
         Moll (Ed.) Vygotzky and education (pp. 319-348 ). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Nurmela, K., Lehtinen, E., & Palonen, T. (1999). Evaluating CSCL log files by social network analysis. Proceedings of
         CSCL'99 (Palo Alto, CA, December 1999). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 434-444.
Palonen, T. & Hakkarainen, K. (2000). Patterns of interaction in computer-supported learning: A social network analysis.
         Proceedings of ICLS'2000 (Ann Arbor, MI, June 2000), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 334-339.
Webb, N. & Palincsar, A. (1996). Collaborative learning. In D. Berliner (Ed.), Handbook of Educational Psychology (pp.
         345-413), New York: Macmillan.
Wortham, D. W. (1999). Nodal and matrix analyses of communication patterns in small groups. Proceedings of CSCL'99
         (Palo Alto, CA, December 1999). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 681-683.
