Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   558

        Promoting the Coordination of Computer-mediated
                               Interdisciplinary Collaboration
         Nikol Rummel, Hans Spada, Fabian Hermann, Franz Caspar, Katrin Schornstein
                   Psychologisches Institut, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Germany
                                 e-mail: <last name>@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
ABSTRACT
The goal of this research is to promote the coordination of computer-mediated interdisciplinary collaboration of partners
with complementary expertise. Efficient collaboration is shown to depend strongly on the quality of the coordination
activities. A first experiment investigated the effects of different technical realizations of computer-mediated collaboration
on the coordination of activities. It revealed that especially a well-balanced sequence of phases of joint work and individual
working phases was central for the quality of the problem-solving process. The goal of a second experiment was to test the
effectiveness of promoting this coordination by vicarious learning from an exemplary computer-mediated collaboration. By
combining two strands of research ­ studies on worked-out examples and work on vicarious learning from dialogue and
discourse ­ we show a new and theoretically well-founded way to strengthen collaborative competence.

EXPERIMENT              1:  EFFECTS           OF    DIFFERENT            TECHNICAL             SETTINGS         ON     THE
COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES
The goal of the first study (see also Hermann, Rummel & Spada, 2001) was to investigate the effects of different technical
realizations of  a collaborative setting  on the collaborative process and    its efficiency. The collaborative task (in both
experiments), was the solution of psychiatric case studies. Dyads of advanced medical and psychology students were asked
to jointly formulate a diagnosis and a therapy plan making use of their complementary expertise. The main coordination
demands (cf. Malone and Crowston, 1990) of the task were to identify and sequentiate different types of activities (i.e.
content-related discussion and decisions, writing text) and to identify which parts of the task had to be solved together and
which could be dealt with individually. A 2 x 2 design with eight dyads of participants in each cell was implemented
varying the following factors: (1) A high-end videoconferencing system with shared text-editor was compared with a more
"conservative"    system,  including  e-mail and an audio  connection    (via telephone). (2)   A  condition  with prescribed
collaboration phases was compared with an unscripted condition. In the scripted condition, the goal was to foster an optimal
coordination of the collaborative work.
With regard to the quality of the final solution the telephone and e-mail conditions turned out to be significantly better than
the videoconferencing     conditions. The differences in  the unscripted   conditions can be    illuminated by looking at the
collaborative process itself. In the unscripted condition with telephone and e-mail all work patterns showed collaborative
and individual work phases, whereas some dyads in the condition with videoconference and shared text-editor tended to
work only collaboratively (4 of 8 dyads). The difference between the two conditions was significant (Chi=5.33, F=1,
p=.02). The best explanation of this finding might be that in the videoconference condition the strong support of joint
activities kept some dyads from task division and working individually. The result is corroborated by a lower quality of
final solutions for those dyads that did not work individually at any time: They produced poorer solutions (AM=.31 percent
of met criteria) than dyads working both, jointly and individually (AM=.39). This result is statistically significant (t=1.89,
F=1, p=.04, onesided). It is in line with the result, that the scripted collaboration with phases of individual and joint work
yielded better solutions.
These results indicate, that the coordination of individual working phases with phases of joint work is of central importance
for the quality of the problem solving process and its outcome. However, while a prescription of coordination might work
in the initial phase of a collaboration it seems not to be a very promising strategy for longer periods of collaborative work.
Therefore,   in a  second  experiment  we  pursued  the  goal  to have dyads   of  participants with complementary    domain
knowledge acquire collaborative competence.

EXPERIMENT              2:  VICARIOUS          LEARNING           FROM        WORKED-OUT             EXAMPLES             OF
COMPUTER-MEDIATED COLLABORATION
In  the second   study, a  new instructional  measure for promoting    the coordination of    computer-mediated  synchronous
collaboration was introduced, which integrates (1) the concept of worked-out examples (e.g. Renkl, 1997), and (2) that of
vicarious learning from dialogue and discourse (Stenning, McKendree, Cox, Dineen & Mayes, 1999). The learning effect of
a worked-out case study ­ presented as a model of an ideal collaboration ­ on process and outcome of a subsequent
computer-mediated collaboration (application phase) was to be analyzed and compared to the learning effect of scripted
collaborative problem-solving and the performance of a control group. Vicarious learning from the modeled collaboration
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                 page 559

was   expected to promote    students             competence  to collaborate      during the   application     phase. In  comparison,      scripted
collaboration is known to be an efficient method to support collaboration online. However, the question was whether it had
the potential to trigger learning and promote the competence for collaborative work and its coordination. The design of the
study is shown in the table below. Two experimental groups and one control group were formed consisting of nine dyads
each.
                                                         Vicarious learning from     Learning from scripted        Control group
                                                         an exemplary worked-out     collaborative problem-
                                                         collaboration               solving
  30 min.          Technical instruction
  15 min.          Material (case study 1)                                                                                   ­
  120 min.         Experimental learning phase             observing a worked-out                                            ­
                   (case study 1)                           modeled collaboration       scripted collaboration
  15 min.          Material (case study 2)
  120 min.         Application phase (case
                   study 2)                                  free collaboration           free collaboration          Free collaboration
  30 min.          Posttest

Process   and outcome    of  the        dyads'    collaboration  during   the     application phase of       the experiment were    analyzed    to
investigate the learning effects of the two experimental variations on the promotion of the competence for the coordination
of computer-mediated collaborative work and its outcome. To gain information about the collaborative process, log-files
taken during the application phase were analyzed to identify patterns of individual and joint phases of work. The amount of
individual work (in minutes) has been found to decrease from the vicarious learning condition (M = 52,8) to scripted
collaboration condition (M = 44,6) and the control condition (M = 40,7). Moreover, the control group showed strongly
diverging patterns (SDcontrol = 28.64; SDscripted collaboration learning = 12.43; SDvicarious learning = 11.86) . To corroborate this finding,
the difference between model pattern and empirical patterns was analyzed statistically. The exemplary (optimal) length of
individual work phases was compared with the empirical data by computing the absolute differences (Mvicarious learning = 9.33;
SD  = 7.92; Mscripted    collaboration learning = 13.33; SD = 11.35;    Mcontrol  = 26.56;   SD = 18.08).      The result shows   a significantly
higher deviation for the control condition and the scripted collaboration learning condition compared to the vicarious
learning condition (F (2,40) = 4.23; p < .05).
Obviously,  dyads in   the  vicarious           learning condition     learned  from the  modeled   collaboration     and  therefore     showed  a
coordination pattern similar to the one presented to them in the worked-out example. In comparison, dyads in the scripted
collaboration group transferred less from the first (scripted) to the second (unscripted) collaboration. In the control group a
considerable amount of collaboration patterns showed much joint activity and not enough parallel individual work, but also
a great deal of variance with regard to these variables. It has yet to be proven whether these firsts results can be confirmed
by the results for the quality of the joint solution as well as the performance on the posttest. Further results on those
dependent variables will be presented at the conference.

REFERENCES
Hermann, F., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2001). Solving the Case Together: the Challenge of Net- based Interdisciplinary
          Collaboration. In  P.        Dillenbourg,    A.  Eurelings,   &  K.     Hakkarainen  (Eds.), Proceedings      of the   First   European
          Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. Maastricht, NL.
Malone, T.W. & Crowston, K. (1990). What is coordination theory and how can it help design cooperative work systems?
          In F. Halasz (Ed.) Proceedings of the Conference on Computer- Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 357-370). Los
          Angeles, CA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 1-29.
Stenning, K., McKendree, J., Cox, R., Dineen, F. & Mayes, T. (1999). Vicarious learning from educational dialogue. In C.
          Hoadley & J. Roschelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 1999
          Conference. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
