Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 562

 Using EPO to Stimulate Learning in the Health Sciences
                         Leo Plugge*, Paul Kirschner, Gaby Lutgens, Jan Vermunt
                                     Stichting SURF / Maastricht University
        plugge@surf.nl / paul.kirschner@facburfdaw.unimaas.nl / g.lutgens@mmi.unimaas.nl /
                                             j.vermunt@educ.unimaas.nl
ABSTRACT
Maastricht University is renowned for its use of Problem Based Learning (PBL) as the primary educational form since
1976. Although PBL has been immensely successful (Schmidt, 2001) it also has its drawbacks, such as the paucity of `real'
collaboration. This article describes an educational experiment aimed at implementing Project Centered Learning (PCL) for
part-time students at the Health Sciences faculty supported by an Electronic Project Environment (EPO in Dutch). The
results show that PCL is a good educational method for third year students in the Health Sciences and that the EPO offers a
valuable support to the group work of these students who live all over the country. The study also reveals some aspects of
PCL and EPO that need rethinking and possibly revision in further experiments.

Keywords
Collaborative  learning, Project-centered learning,  Computer     Supported    Collaborative   Learning,  Distributed  learning
groups, Part-time students, Health Sciences

INTRODUCTION
Problem Based Education (Barrows & Tamblyn, 1980) has been the central tenet of education at Maastricht University
(MU) since its inception. While still successful, educational designers are beginning to question whether this educational
method is suitable in teaching students to rely more on each other to find relevant information for solving new problems.
To make thing even more complicated, these new problems are usually ill defined requiring excellent group decision-
making skills.
One alternative to PBL is Project Centered Learning (PCL). PCL activates students to learn both the content and the
processes of their chosen field by having them work collaboratively in teams on a project to deliver a product within a well-
defined time span. Not only are the projects authentic, but also the work situation is authentic. Students work in teams
performing the roles that they would perform if they were actually in a working environment.
This contribution describes an experiment in which a commercially available electronic project environment (EPO) was
used to facilitate  PCL  with two  groups of  third year    part-time students   at the Health   Sciences faculty at MU.  The
environment is based on the Basic Support for Cooperative Work project of the German National Research Center for
Information  technology.  (Appelt, 1999;  Bentley   et. al, 1997) The   primary     goals of the experiment  were  to  increase
collaboration and active studying behavior. The students in this study are geographically dispersed, work differing shifts,
meet only once a week, and have hardly any contact with each other between the meetings.

METHODS
Twelve  third  year part-time students  from the  Health    Sciences  faculty (3 males,   9  females) took  the course Making
decisions about healthcare. The students were randomly divided into two groups of six persons. Additionally, a tutor and a
technical assistant were assigned to each group.
The  project environment   consisted of a private  and   a  group space. The     group  space  contained  a document   archive,
discussion forum, project calendar, task and Gantt planning facility, contacts, participant's directory, wastebasket, group
announcements, and web based help system. The environment is accessible through a web browser.
The course was consisted of three subprojects. The final task required an integration of the previous two subprojects. Each
subproject ended with a joint report and an oral presentation by the members of the group. The course lasted for 64 days;
each subproject approximately 3 weeks. Meetings took place on a Friday every fortnight.
To evaluate the experiment, three measurements took place: pre-experimental, intermediate, and post-experimental (all
questionnaires). The first questionnaire contained items from the Computer Attitude Scale (CAS) (Nickel & Pinto, 1987),
and from the Computer Understanding and Experience Scale (CUE) (Potosky & Bobko, 1998). Additionally, data was
gathered from the daily activity logs produced by the electronic project environment.

* Requests for reprints should be addressed to Dr. L.A. Plugge, Stichting SURF, P.O.Box 2290, 3500 GG Utrecht, The
 Netherlands
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 563

RESULTS
The results show that the experiment was successful in many ways, while at the same time providing insight into the
problems of PCL that need to be resolved.
First, there is the pleasure the students reported about working in teams on a project. They enjoyed working together on an
end product, and it stimulated them to combine theory and praxis. The students also reported that the study time was higher
than in PBL, that it stimulated discussion more, and appealed more to relevant professional skills than PBL. However, the
students also  reported  that the theoretical knowledge   acquired was      fragmented. The  cause behind this feeling of
fragmentation is the division of labor during the project. Each student studied a different part of the subject and had to rely
on reports from others.
The EPO proved to be a very good means of supporting asynchronous collaboration. The results clearly show that the
students appreciated the EPO capabilities to exchange documents, discuss problems and plan their activities. It is interesting
to note, that the students' mediocre computer skills did not affect their achievements in a negative way. They experienced
EPO as a useful tool and fun to work with. In other words, contrary to what is often reported, computer skills are not a
dominant factor of success in using an electronic environment.
Finally, the results showed that the students clearly had to get used to this open-ended type of education. They had to learn
how to plan their study, they had to spend more time studying, and that it broke up their normal studying routine. This was,
however, exactly one of the objectives of the experiment.

CONCLUSIONS
Overall, the educational model, the project work and the collaboration all appreciated highly by the students, as well as the
EPO. The experiment succeeded in increasing time spent on studying and in spreading study activities across the whole
week. In general then, it can be concluded that this experiment met its objectives. PCL turned out to be a good educational
method for third year students in the Health Sciences and the EPO offered a valuable support to the group work of these
part time students who lived all over the country. However, there is room for improvement concerning the fragmentation of
the acquired knowledge, the clarity of the learning objectives, and the size of the projects. Some questions remain. This
study was done with part time students who lived far apart from each other. This does not mean that the EPO works in the
same way for full time students who meet each other frequently in the faculty buildings. A next experiment will address
this issue.

REFERENCES
Schmidt, H. (2001). 3900 Alumni geven hun mening: Effecten van probleemgestuurd onderwijs na het afstuderen [3900
alumni give their opinion: Effects of problem based education after graduation]. MCMLXXVI-MMI. Jubileum book on the
25th anniversary of the university. Maastricht: Universiteit Maastricht.
Barrows, H. S., & Tamblyn, R. M. (1980). Problem-based learning: An approach to medical education. New York, NY:
Springer Verlag.
Appelt, W. (1999) WWW Based Collaboration with the BSCW System. Proceedings of SOFSEM'99, Springer Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 1725, p.66-78.
Nickel, G.S., and Pinto, J.N. (1986) The Computer Attitude Scale. Computers in Human Behavior, 2: 301-306.
Potosky, D. & Bobko, P. (1998). The Computer Understanding and Experience Scale: A self-report measure of computer
experience. Computers in Human Behavior, 14, 2: 337-348.
