Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 564

    Synchronizing Group Interactions with Lecturing Video
         in Agent-based Asynchronous Virtual Classroom
                                 Hiroaki Ogata, Kenji Matsuura, Yoneo Yano
                                   Faculty of Engineering, Tokushima University
                               2-1, Minamijosanjima, Tokushima, 770-8506, Japan
                                         Email: ogata@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp
                                    URL: http://cscl.is.tokushima-u.ac.jp/ogata
ABSTRACT
This paper tackles to develop and evaluate the asynchronous virtual classroom, called AVC, which enables learners to
participate in at anytime and from anywhere. Its environment provides on-demand multimedia learning-materials, e.g.
videos of the lecture, slides  and web   pages. To  utilize  the two types of  learning resources, on-demand  materials  and
asynchronous interactions, the system synchronizes links and reproduces them toward efficient learning. To realize that, a
software agent participates to the classroom behalf of a real learner and replays the past interactions along with the video.
Besides this, we propose the model that a software agent recommends the suitable interactions for the current learner
according to his/her interest.
Keywords
Asynchronous virtual classroom, Video on demand, Collaborative annotation, and Software agent.

INTRODUCTION
We have proposed the system, called AVC (Asynchronous Virtual Classroom), which allows learners to use at anytime and
anywhere (Matsuura et al., 1999; 2000). The system provides multimedia learning materials, e.g., video of the lecture,
slides, and text-based communication tools such as a bulletin board system. The basic idea is that the AVC system enables
learners to share the past interactions about the leaning material, and reuses them appropriately for the later participants. To
utilize the past action logs (question, answer, and annotation) that were stored in the same classroom, the system employs a
software agent, which simulates the past interactions as an animation. In the reproduction, each statement appears on a
series of relative time in the virtual classroom. The past activities have to be synchronized with the learning material. As is
often case with an asynchronous system, it is easily figured out that the difficult situation to communicate with others (e.g.,
unless anyone asks another person, none exists at the same time) will occur among asynchronous participants (Ogata et al,
1996; 2000). Therefore, the system bridges asynchronous participants by notifying others' activities in her/his absence at
the same  classroom and   by    reproducing their activities in  order of the relative timestamp   when s/he joins the  same
classroom again.
Through the past experimental use, we found a critical problem to be solved that the subsequent learners often felt stress to
read past discussions with a video. This problem was caused in a case that many topics were included in one discussion
room  and some   contexts appeared    at random   based on    absolute  timestamp. However,   this was  originated from   the
framework itself essentially. The most characteristic point of the AVC system is to synchronize the past interactions with
on-demand learning materials. In other words, the system must update the contents of the past interactions on the video's
time-line. Nevertheless, both of them have their own time span. Hence, this paper proposes the new idea to solve this
problem, which is the adaptive support for synchronizing interactions with on-demand video-based learning materials in an
asynchronous virtual classroom.
Figure 1 shows an example of AVC interface. A learner can watch on the video in frame (A), where the learner can control
the video, e.g., jumping to a video section. Frame (B) shows slides or web pages of the lecture with the video synchronized.
The learner can annotate on them. Frame (C) and frame (D) shows a 3D virtual classroom. The learner can walk around in
the virtual space. Frame (E) shows the animated reproduction of the asynchronous dialogues among learners along with the
video time line. The system sorts out the discussions based on her/his curiosity. In this frame, the picture of each user is
shown in the left side and his/her statement is shown in the left side. A learner can add the statement by clicking one of the
statements in (E). Moreover, the leaner can enter the statement in frame (F) after stopping the video and selecting the type
of his/her agent's face and its behavior and the type of statements. In this way, the asynchronous dialogues can augment.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                page 565

  (F) Entering an argument                      (A) Streaming video                         (B) Slide

                                                                                                                               Video time
     Course name:   XML                                                                                                         00:12.57
     User name:      Kenji                                                                                                        Start
               Edit user profile

      Face:        Behavior: Rise hand

         Edit your action (AACML)

     What do you mean?

      Intention:  Question           Enter

            (Q) What is XML?

            (A) A kind of SGML.

            (Q) What is SGML?

                                                                                                  Help
            (A) Standard Generalized Mark
                 up Language.

            (Q) Is this an international
                 standard?

  (E) Replaying dialogue.                      (C) Virtual classroom from the learner view.   (D) Virtual classroom from a birds-eye view
                                                       Figure 1: A screen snapshot of AVC.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper introduces the interface agent to act for real learners in a same classroom. This agent reproduces the past
interactions to the current learner on behalf of the absentees. These reproduced dialogues are sorted based on the priority of
each learner's curiosity and filtered by the time span of section of the video. This work was partly supported by the grant to
the research     project   at    Doshisha    University named  "Intelligent   Information     Science   and  It's Applications to        Problem
Solving     in   Engineering      Fields",    and  the  Grant-in-Aid     for Scientific     Research   No.13780121,    No.12558011,           and
No.11878032 from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Japan, from the Ministry of Education.

REFERENCES
Matsuura, K., Ogata, H., & Yano, Y. (1999). Agent-based Asynchronous Virtual Classroom, Proceedings of International
        Conference         on    Computers     in Education  1999,    in Cumming,  G.,      Okamoto,    T., Gomez,   L., (Eds.),        Advanced
        research in computers and communications in education, Vol.1, pp.133-140.
Matsuura, K., Ogata, H., & Yano, Y. (2000). Agent's contribution for an Asynchronous Virtual Classroom, Proceedings of
        ITS 2000, in Gauthier, G., Frasson, C., VanLehn, K. (Eds.), LNCS1839, Intelligent Tutoring Systems, pp.344-353.
Ogata,  H.,    Matsuura,         K., &     Yano,  Y. (1996). Knowledge       Awareness:      Bridging   between   Shared  Knowledge           and
        Collaboration in Sharlok, Proceedings of Educational Telecommunications 1996, pp.232-237.
Ogata, H. & Yano, Y. (2000) Combining Knowledge Awareness and Information Filtering in an Open-ended Collaborative
        Learning Environment, International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Vol.11, pp.33-46.
