Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page   573

 Fostering Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
                  with Cooperation Scripts and Scaffolds
                               Armin Weinberger, Frank Fischer, Heinz Mandl
              Institute of Educational Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich,
                                           Leopoldstr. 13, 80802 Munich
        weinberg@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de, fischerf@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de, mandl@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de
ABSTRACT
The study   investigates collaborative learning of  small  groups    via text-based   computer-mediated    communication.    We
analyzed how two approaches to pre-structure communication influence participation, individual knowledge transfer, the
convergence of participation and the convergence of knowledge among peers. We varied the factor scripted cooperation
and the factor scaffolding in a 2x2-design. 105 university students of Educational Psychology participated. Results show
that scripted cooperation was most and scaffolding least beneficial to individual transfer, knowledge convergence and
participation in comparison to open discourse.

Keywords
CSCL, knowledge convergence, shared knowledge, participation, scripted cooperation, scaffolding, cues, cued interaction,
computer-mediated communication, text-based communication, case-based learning environments

BACKGROUND AND GOALS OF THE STUDY
In collaborative, problem-oriented learning environments groups of learners are supposed to discuss and solve cases in an
active and reflective way. However, learning in open discussion rarely seems to result in equal and high participation and
equally distributed high individual transfer. Studies on CSCL show that these negative effects are usually replicated or even
increased in new, technology-rich learning environments (e.g. Fischer & Mandl, 2001). This study investigates instructional
means (scripted cooperation and scaffolding) to support participation and individual transfer of knowledge in case-based
CSCL environments. Moreover, we analyze to what extent convergence of participation and convergence of knowledge of
the learning partners can be fostered in CSCL.
Text-based,   computer-mediated   communication   offers  the  possibility   to structure  the learners' discourse   and can  be
designed to guide users through certain successive activities (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1996). Scaffolding and scripted
cooperation can be implemented with cues that have been previously inserted into messages of learners in order to pre-
structure  communication   and possibly   influence reflection  and  thereby    also learning  outcomes.  These   methods    may
substitute extensive training and adaptive feedback by co-present experts. On this background, the study investigates the
effects of cued  scaffolding and  scripted cooperation   and   their combination     with  regard to (1)  participation  and  the
convergence   of participation within   a  learning  group  and  (2)     the individual   knowledge   transfer   and knowledge
convergence.

METHOD
After a pre-test including a problem case participants of all conditions of the 2x2-design were asked to individually study a
three page description of attribution theory, which is standard curriculum content. After this individual phase, the learners
worked together on three cases communicating via a web-based discussion board in which the cued scaffolding and the
cued cooperation script were implemented (see figure 1). The collaboration was followed by an individual post-test that
included another case. Time-on-task was 3 hours in all four conditions.
Cues of scaffolding and of cooperation script were automatically inserted into the messages of the learners. The cues of
scaffolding were questions about the case. Thus, the students' task was basically to respond and jointly elaborate on the
given cues. The cues of the scripted cooperation was supposed to support students to take over the role of an analyzer for
one of the three cases and the role of a critic for the remaining two cases.
Collected  data include  learning prerequisites (motivation,   interest, anxiety,  etc.), participation  (e.g. words  produced),
participation convergence  (similarity of  participation inside one   group),   individual  knowledge    transfer (inferences of
theoretical concepts on case information) and knowledge convergence (sum of shared inferences, i.e. inferences which two
or three participants of one group had in common in the individual transfer case).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                           page 574

                Laboratory room 1                            Laboratory room 2                        Laboratory room 3

                               Triad connected to a problem-oriented online learning environment with a discussion board

           Task information
           and timer

                                                                                                                Case information

         Scripted cooperation:
         Guided tour through all
         three cases

                                                                                                          Cues of scaffolding,
         Cues of scripted                                                                                 e.g.:
         cooperation, e.g.:

           These     aspects    are  not  clear  to me  yet:              Does   a success   or a  failure  precede             this
                                                                          attribution?

           We  have    not   yet  reached   consensus                     Is   the attribution   located   internally             or
           concerning       these   aspects:                              externally?

           My  proposals       for  an adjustment   of  the               Is   the cause  for  the  attribution             stabile
           analysis:                                                      or   variable?

 Figure 1: The experimental setup and the online learning environment. In the upper part you can see three participants in
                      separate rooms communicating via a discussion board that is illustrated in the lower part.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The findings     show        that   participation,   participation convergence,          individual   knowledge               transfer  and   convergence   of
knowledge can be influenced not only by the preliminary training and moderation of collaborative learning, as studies have
shown before, but also by the cue-based implementation of scripted cooperation and scaffolding into an online learning
environment that structures the learning discourse itself.
The cued      cooperation         script  proved    to  support  learners       substantially     in comparison              to open     discourse regarding
participation, convergence of participation, individual knowledge transfer and knowledge convergence. It was possible to
replicate the positive effects of former research on scripted cooperation with scripted cooperation implemented with cues.
Learners appeared to be encouraged to confront their ideas with those of their partners, reflect on the differences of
perspectives, and sometimes modify their initial point of view.
A cued scaffolding           of   problem-oriented     collaborative    learning     did   not    show   substantial            effects  on   participation or
participation  convergence,         but   was   significantly   least beneficial      to the    individual               knowledge   transfer and  knowledge
convergence in comparison to the other treatments. Maybe, the scaffolding did not foster the transfer as effectively as the
other treatments, since important processes of learning failed to take place. Like a checklist, it may have facilitated the
identification of relevant problems and their solution during the collaborative phase, but did not support the participants in
developing a conceptual understanding of their own. Consequently, an integral part of scaffolding should be the fading of
this kind of support. Maybe the scaffolding rather fostered individual than collaborative approaches to solve the cases. A
joint effort to reflect on the application of theoretical concepts to case information may not have appeared relevant to the
learners, as the scaffolding suggested an individual approach to solve the cases. We are currently investigating the discourse
regarding collaborative knowledge construction in order to confirm or reject these hypotheses.
REFERENCES
Fischer, F., & Mandl, H. (2001). Facilitating the construction of shared knowledge with graphical representation tools in
       face-to-face            and  computer-mediated        scenarios. In      P.  Dillenbourg,     A.  Eurelings,             &    K.  Hakkarainen  (Eds.),
       Proceedings of euro-CSCL 2001 (Maastricht, NL, March 2001), 230-236.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. In T. Koschmann (Ed.),
       CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 249-268). Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
