Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page    575

    Multiplicity & Flexibility as Design and Implementation
Features ­ A Case Study of a Web-Based CL Community
                                       for Diverse Learners
                  C. Y. Janey Wang                                                    Paul E. Resta
                University of Texas at Austin                                 University of Texas at Austin
                 janeywon@mail.utexas.edu                                          resta@mail.utexas.edu
ABSTRACT
This presentation describes   multiplicity and  flexibility as  important  factors in  designing  online  collaborative learning
environments. The presentation: (1) describes the design features of an award-winning Web-based course using extensive
online collaborative learning; (2) examines and discusses four aspects and specific features of the course that supported
multiplicity in design, development, implementation, and assessment; (3) discusses implications for future course design
and research of online collaborative learning environments.

Keywords
Multiplicity, flexibility, Web-based learning, collaborative-learning, design, community, diversity
INTRODUCTION
John Dewey said, "The main purpose of instruction is to prepare the young for future responsibilities and for success in
life." (Dewey, 1938, p. 17) In Asia, Confucius said, "Education should be provided indiscriminately. Teaching should be
tailored discriminately."
The Internet provides unique opportunities to prepare learners for "future responsibilities" and "success in life," as well as
tailoring instruction to meet individual learner's needs, interests, and strengths from diverse backgrounds.
The  presentation describes    the context,  assumptions,    objectives,   and  structure    of an  award-winning    Web-based
collaborative-learning course, Instructional Technology Management and Planning (ITPM), offered in the spring of 2001.
This course  received  the   "National Distance  Learning      Course    Award" from    the  University   Continuing Education
Association and the instructor received the "2001 Excellence in Distance Learning Teaching Award for Higher Education"
from the U.S. Distance Learning Association.
This presentation describes how and why multiplicity and flexibility were incorporated in the design, development, and
implementation of an online course that emphasized collaborative learning. Essential features addressing multiplicity and
flexibility will be discussed including: multiple course representations, tools, communication types and channels, support,
interactions, flexible course structure, personalized communication and feedback system, and cultural-sensitivity to better
meet the needs of learners from diverse backgrounds.

ONLINE COLLABORATIVE LEARNING
Collaborative learning strategies and online learning communities are increasingly incorporated within Web-based courses.
Within these communities learning is derived from the negotiation and construction of knowledge among members. Based
on  emergent   instructional needs,  this  curriculum is    not  static, but  evolves   throughout    the design,  development,
implementation, and course revision process. One of the challenges in creating cooperative and collaborative learning
communities  is  how  to   engage  students' participation   and interaction.  To     engage learners, the tasks  should   satisfy
individual and  group goals.  The  presentation describes   the  ways    multiplicity and flexibility can  help facilitate learner
engagement and participation in the collaborative learning process.

SUMMARY
THE COURSE CONTEXT
The ITPM course was situated in a virtual environment where students met through online interactions. An authentic virtual
environment with authentic tasks was created based on the metaphor of a hypothetical school district, Mustang Independent
School District (MISD), composed of five schools. Data were derived from actual U.S. school districts, while problem- and
project-based approaches to learning were employed. The major product was the "technology plan" that students produced
collaboratively. In order to learn how to obtain funding support, each group also wrote a grant proposal based on their
technology plan.
To accomplish course requirements, online socialization and communication were essential, as were extensive cooperation
and collaboration among learners of diverse backgrounds. Authentic tools were employed to support the development of
the strategic technology plan including the TechBuilder suite of tools and survey forms. In addition special spreadsheet
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 576

forms were used for budget development, hardware and software inventories, as well as other tools such as GANNT charts
for project scheduling. WebCT and Vcampus courseware were employed to provide access to course content and virtual
environment. FirstClass groupware was also used to support the collaborative activites of the virtual planning teams. For
synchronous interaction, the online chat function was used. Learners participated in monthly videoconferences on campus
(face-to-face) or by way of network Webcasts, which served as a monthly forum for guest experts' discussion of relevant
topics, teams to share their work, and instructor to answer student questions or give advice. The course contained eight
modules; module tasks progressed from simple to complex.
Learners   were either on-campus     students at  University  of Texas,  Austin  or  distance-learning  students   employing
"TeleCampus" from across Texas, Georgia, and New York. On-campus students had the option of meeting the instructor,
staff, and peers face-to-face or through the Internet while off-campus students could only connect via the network and
phone communication.

MULTIPLICITY AND FLEXIBILITY: DESIGN FEATURES FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS
Multiplicity refers to the multiple ways of presenting and delivering course material, channels of communication, activity
offerings, and learning strategies. Flexibility refers to the welcoming of and openness to questions and suggestions, timely
support, options for learning tasks, and provision of individualized feedback throughout the course. Four major course
aspects were observed to address multiplicity and flexibility including: course content and structure; communication tools,
channels, and types; support, accessibility, and feedback; and performance assessment.
Multiple learning contexts and activities were provided in the ITPM course, such as self-learning, small group, cross-group
learning,  and  whole  class  forums and  interactions. Multimedia   (text, audio,   video, simulation) and   multiple  tools
(TechBuilder, StaR Chart, Technology Profile Tool, and Milken Professional Competency Assessment) were structured for
aesthetic representations and cognitive task engagement. Multiple course activity options were provided in consideration of
divergent interests, values, and backgrounds of students. Multiple sources and kinds of support and feedback ­ as well as
multiple channels of communication ­ were made available, including the instructor, a teaching assistant, administrative
and technical staff, outsourcing consultants, area experts, and community members. Multiple assessment methods used to
maintain student accountability included evaluations by the instructor, by self-evaluation, and by peers. Multiple instruction
approaches were employed to motivate students of various cultures, intellectual levels, motivation, and interest.
Flexibility in design involves knowledge of and sensitivity to cultural diversity. It also requires enhanced understanding,
communication, and instructional content and options tailored to the needs of the individual learner. In the ITPM course,
students were encouraged to think "outside of the box" in looking beyond the obvious, and to value multiple perspectives.
This entailed students seeking out relevant resources and utilizing their knowledge and creativity rather than confining
themselves  to  traditional ways  of thinking  and  learning.  Because  no  plan  is perfect, course  content and   schedule
adjustments were made as necessary throughout the implementation process. Flexibility in meeting emergent needs of
diverse learners required careful monitoring of the learning processes and individual student progress in order to make
appropriate  adjustments    and modifications  in  schedule,   approaches,  and  methods    employed.  For example,     when
technological failures or technical setbacks occurred, individual support and scaffolding was provided to accommodate
learners' unforeseen  personal  problems and   difficulties. A  weekly newsletter  provided   announcements,  clarifications,
information updates, and reminders.
Students' end-of-course evaluations revealed positive results and feedback, as did students' peer and product evaluations.
ITPM students' end-of-module reflections expressed enthusiasm about their learning throughout the semester. Students
expressed their satisfaction with the tools they were exposed to, tasks they had accomplished, and the online social and
collaborative skills acquired through group interactions. Based on our experience with the course, we have found that
considerations of multiplicity and flexibility on various aspects of design, development, and implementation phases are
important elements in the success in online collaborative learning environments.

REFERENCES
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. New Jersey: Collier Book.
