Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   577

Structuring Group Learning within a Web-based Science
                                           Inquiry Program
                                       Louise Yarnall, William R. Penuel
                             Center for Technology in Learning, SRI International
                                    louise.yarnall@sri.com and william.penuel@sri.com
ABSTRACT
With an increased emphasis on inquiry in science education nationwide, we examined trends in the ways science teachers
organized students into groups to implement one prominent one Web-based science inquiry program, Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE). Our study focused on survey and case study data that SRI International
collected as part of its ongoing evaluation of GLOBE (Means et al., 2001). We hypothesized: (1) teachers who are active in
implementing an inquiry-based science program more frequently employ collaboration for cognitively complex activities
than teachers who are less active implementers; (2) active teachers use collaboration more over time; and, (3) active
GLOBE teachers who organize learning by collaborative groups perceive greater learning benefits than active teachers who
rarely used collaboration. Our study confirmed that active teachers of an inquiry-based science program use collaboration
more over time, but they are no more likely than less active teachers to see collaboration as beneficial to student learning.
We also found that active teachers were likely to use collaborative small groups primarily to support data collection and
reporting tasks to make them fit better into the classroom schedule than for data analysis and interpretation.

Keywords
collaboration, science inquiry, classroom culture

INTRODUCTION
The emphasis   on scientific inquiry standards  (AAAS,  1993;    NRC,  1996,  2000) has led  more teachers      to incorporate
collaborative projects and investigations into classroom practice. . Two decades of cognitive research cite many benefits of
collaboration on student learning, especially in science (Dansereau, 1988; Forman & Larreamendy-Joerns, 1995; Jeong &
Chi, 1997; NRC, 1999). In this study, we wanted to examine teachers' reasons and actual practices for using student
collaboration to  teach  one prominent   inquiry   science program,  Global   Learning  and  Observations      to  Benefit the
Environment (GLOBE). GLOBE is a seven-year-old international science and education program that involves elementary
and secondary students in 9,658 schools in 95 countries. Backed by NOAA, NASA, NSF, the Environmental Protection
Agency and the Departments of Education and State, GLOBE attempts to improve science achievement and environmental
awareness by having K-12 students collect data about atmosphere, water, soil, and land cover, report those data regularly to
a central Web site, and analyze those data via Web-based visualization tools. More than 10,000 teachers have been trained
in GLOBE since its beginning, and there are 5.7 million pieces of student data reported. We hypothesized active U.S.
GLOBE teachers probably used collaboration more often for more cognitively complex types of GLOBE activities than less
active teachers -- a random sample of U.S. teachers who had been trained in GLOBE but who were reporting less data to
the GLOBE Web site. We also hypothesized that active GLOBE teachers would use collaboration more over time, and that
they held more positive perceptions of the pedagogical benefits of group work than less active GLOBE teachers.

METHODOLOGY
We analyzed data collected from 390 active U.S. teachers and 131 active international teachers who were selected because
their classes regularly submitted data to the GLOBE Web site from December 1999-February 2000. We also analyzed data
from a random sample of 512 teachers trained in the United States between June 1998 and August 1999, and who generally
chose not to  implement   GLOBE     or who  reported  less data. We  also  used case study  data featuring     interviews  and
observations  collected during site visits to five GLOBE     sites across the United States. To  test our      hypotheses, we
aggregated data from our GLOBE Year 5 evaluation (Means et al., 2000) that compared how frequently active teachers and
less active teachers organized students into six possible social configurations (single student, small group, multiple small
groups, whole class, adult, no one) to engage in five different categories of GLOBE activity (data collection, data entry,
data exploration on Web, data analysis, learning activities). To check for changes in use of collaboration over time, we
compared two years' of teacher surveys. To compare perceptions of learning benefits, we divided perception data into two
groups at active GLOBE teachers: frequent and infrequent group users.

RESULTS
The results showed that active GLOBE teachers used collaboration more than less active teachers for the procedural tasks
of data collection, data entry, and exploring data on the Web site. Active GLOBE teachers did not differ from less-active
GLOBE teachers in their use of small groups to support more cognitively complex tasks such as student-led discussions of
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page   578

GLOBE data, preferring to a whole class, teacher-led discussion. In our case studies of active GLOBE schools, we did
observe teachers engaging students in collaborative inquiry into data discussion, but we also observed group work being
used as a way to manage data collection activities. At the same time, active GLOBE teachers organized students into groups
more in 1999-2000 than they did in 1997-98. Active GLOBE teachers' use of small groups for data entry increased 12
percent. More than 90 percent of active GLOBE teachers and 82 percent of less active GLOBE teachers perceived similar
benefits to collaboration, both for improving group skills and data understanding.

CONCLUSION
Our findings    raise questions  about   why  collaboration is   used primarily for  aspects  of science    inquiry related to data
collection and reporting rather than data analysis and interpretation in active GLOBE classrooms. The study shows that
teachers believe students can effectively learn about data collection while working in groups, yet they have not used student
groups more for the tasks of discussing, analyzing, and interpreting data. It may be this finding is partly a result of our
selection procedure, which focused on teachers' frequency of data reporting. It may be that a high proportion of teachers
who report the   most   GLOBE     data  may  be more   focused   on   classroom management     than  engaging  students  in  group
inquiry. It may be that most teachers are overwhelmed by the complexity of GLOBE's collection procedures or lack
materials to scaffold other phases of student-led inquiry. GLOBE has addressed this problem by adding an inquiry element
to its professional development programs. An alternate explanation is that teachers and students may perceive that data
collection is a cognitively complex task, and one that is critical to helping students understand scientific practice. For
example, group-using      active teachers had  more  confidence   in  students' data  collection  abilities than non-group   using
teachers. Finally, it may also be that in the GLOBE program, the small collaborative group is becoming what Saxe (1991)
would call a hybrid form, one that merges the practices and goals of science culture into the classroom culture. The study
suggests that   teachers  need   special  support to engage    student  groups  in  more   complex   tasks  of data   analysis and
interpretation.

REFERENCES
Doise, W., Mugny, G., & Perret-Clermont, A. (1975). Social interaction and the development of cognitive operations.
         European Journal of Social Psychology, 5, 3, 367-383.
Forman, E.A. & Larreamendy-Joerns, J. (1995). Learning in the context of peer collaboration: A pluralistic perspective on
         goals and expertise. Cognition and Instruction, 13, 4, 549-564.
Dansereau, D.F.   (1988).   Cooperative   learning   strategies. In C.E.  Weinstetin,    E.T. Goetz,  &  P.A.  Alexander    (Eds.),
         Learning     and study  strategies: Issues in assessment,    instruction, and   evaluation (pp. 103-120).   Orlando,  FL:
         Academic Press.
Jeong, H. & Chi, M.T.H. (December 1997). Construction of shared knowledge during collaborative learning. Computer
         Support for Collaborative Learning '97 Proceedings, 124-128.
Means, B., Korbak,     C., Lewis,   A.,  Michalchik, V., Penuel,    W.  R., Rollin,  J., & Yarnall,  L.  (2001).    GLOBE   Year 5
         evaluation.      Menlo    Park,   CA:    SRI    International.     (soon    to   appear:    http://archive.globe.gov/sda-
         bin/wt/gh/GRR+L(en)+Dg(gmx/el)Gn(GLOBE~20Program~20Evaluations)
National Research Council. (1999). How people learn: Brain, experience and school. Washington, DC: National Academy
         Press.
Saxe, G.B. (1991). Culture and cognitive development: Studies in mathematical understanding. Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum
         Associates.
