Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  581

         Supporting Discourse in a Synchronous Learning
           Environment: The Learning Protocol Approach
                                              Hans-Rüdiger Pfister
                     Knowledge Media Research Center (KMRC), Tübingen, Germany
                                              r.pfister@iwm-kmrc.de

                                               Martin Mühlpfordt
                                     Fraunhofer IPSI, Darmstadt, Germany
                                                  mamue@ipsi.fhg.de

ABSTRACT
Lack of coordination and coherence among contributions is a typical problem with the use of chat for netbased learning.
We propose so-called learning protocols to increase coordination, coherence, and, hence, the efficiency of learning via chat.
Learning protocols are system controlled cooperation scripts: Participants explicitely identify the reference and the type of
their contributions, and the order of contributions is predetermined. As an example, the explanation protocol is described
and empirical results confirming that structured discourse leads to superior learning are presented.

Keywords
Cooperative learning, learning protocols, cooperation scripts, netbased learning

INTRODUCTION
We focus on the usefulness of synchronous text-based chat for cooperative learning discourses. In traditional face-to-face
settings, the effectiveness of cooperative learning is well established (Slavin, 1995). Cooperation can be further improved
using so-called scripted cooperation. Scripted cooperation implies the application of a more or less rigid schema, i.e., a set
of rules and stages according to which the cooperation proceeds (O'Donnell & Dansereau, 1992). Empirical evidence with
respect to positive effects on knowledge acquisition is mixed, though generally supportive (Huber, 1999; Slavin, 1995).
However,   according  to Hesse,  Garsoffky   and  Hron (1997),   there are  special   problems with     discourse  in virtual
environments: (i) lack of social awareness, (ii) insufficient group coordination, (iii) deficient coherence of contributions.
What we call learning protocols are types of scripted cooperation, which are completely controlled by the system (Pfister et
al., 1998), and intended to overcome the deficiencies of virtual discourses in cooperative learning environments.

LEARNING PROTOCOLS
A learning protocol  requires that learners make  explicit what is usually implicit  in face-to-face   discourse. We  define
learning protocols by four features: (1) Explicit reference: For each  new  contribution, the  referred   to concept  (word,
sentence) is explicitly specified. The reference is represented by an arrow visible for all learners. (2) Typed contributions:
For each contribution, its type is explicitely specified, such as a question, an explanation, etc. (3) Role assignment: Each
participant is assigned a definite role such as learner, tutor, explainer, or commenter, depending on discourse type. (4)
Message sequencing: The succession of contributions is controlled according to a pre-determined pattern.

The Explanation Protocol: An Experimental Test
The explanation learning protocol instantiates a discourse of type "mutual explanation" (Hron et al., 1997), in which a
complicated concept is explained. A tutor serves as the main source of knowledge. The explanation protocol works like
this: (i) The topic is introduced by a short initial text; (ii) each learner has to contribute in turn; (iii) a contribution is made
by first indicating the reference, second, the type of message is selected (Question, Explanation, or Comment), then the
message is send to the public chat pane; (iv) depending on the message type, the next contributor is determined: if a
question has been asked, the tutor is required to give an explanation; otherwise, the next learner is required to submit his
contribution.
We compared a net-based discourse using the learning protocol with an equivalent discourse using conventional free-text
chat as a control condition. Additionally, the type of knowledge was varied: one domain was "earthquakes", and the second
domain was a philosophical topic on "knowing and believing". A total of 24 subjects participated in the study, put together
in groups of three, in a distributed setting. Participants worked through both knowledge domains successively (max. 25
min.). The learning goal for the earthquake domain was "to understand the causes and consequences of earthquakes", for
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  582

the philosophy  domain    "to understand  the  meaning  of the concepts knowing    and   believing". Directly  following each
session, a knowledge test was applied.
The effect of the learning protocol was tested with the test score of the knowledge tests as the dependent variable (range 0
to 17). The mean scores in the earthquake domain were 12.08 (SD = 2.65) for the experimental condition, and 8.67 (SD =
1.93) for the control condition. As expected, participants in the experimental condition learned significantly more than
participants in the control condition, t(22) = 3.61, p < .01. The mean test scores for the philosophy domain were 9.04 (SD =
1.59) for the experimental condition, and 8.21 (SD = 1.54) for the control condition; the difference turned out to be not
significant.

DISCUSSION
Note that the results are preliminary based on a small sample (N = 24), and only a post-test was applied. We are currently
running experiments using a larger sample and a pre-post-test design. However, the positive effect of the learning protocol
in the earthquake domain is quite strong, and in the philosophy domain the difference is in the expected direction. This
confirms the potential of learning protocols to enhance immediate knowledge gains from net-based discussions. It also
shows that the efficiency might depend on the type of knowledge domain.
Several questions remain and need to be studied further. Which features of the learning protocol are essential for knowledge
acquisition?  The   need to  indicate the referent of each contribution is assumed    to lead to a   more coherent cognitive
representation; if a coherent representation in fact mediates learning gains is an open question. The role of message typing
is also far from clear. Not entirely unexpected is the finding that learning protocols work better in some knowledge domains
than in others. One might assume that the explanation protocol is better suited for declarative knowledge acquisition in
science or technology oriented domains, whereas other learning protocols might be better suited for philosophical or ethical
domains.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is funded by the German Research Council (DFG) as part of the priority program "Net-based knowledge
communication in groups". Many thanks go to Martin Wessner, Mareike Hennings, Werner Müller, Mareike Geisen and
Annette Conzelmann for valuable comments and for conducting the experiments.

REFERENCES
Hesse, F. W., Garsoffky, B., & Hron, A. (1997). Interface-Design für computerunterstütztes kooperatives Lernen. In L. J.
        Issing & P. Klimsa (Eds.), Information und Lernen mit Multimedia (pp. 252-267). Weinheim: Psychologie Verlags
        Union.
Hron, A.,    Hesse, F.   W.,  Reinhard,  P., &  Picard, E. (1997).  Strukturierte Kooperation    beim  computerunterstützten
        kollaborativen Lernen. Unterrichtswissenschaft, 25, 56-69.
Huber, A. A. (1999). Bedingungen effektiven Lernens in Kleingruppen unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Rolle von
        Lernskripten. Schwangau: Huber.
O'Donnell,   A. M.,  &   Dansereau,   D.  F. (1992). Scripted cooperation  in student dyads:  A  method   for  analyzing  and
        enhancing    academic   learning  and  performance.   In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz     & N.  Miller  (Eds.), Interaction in
        cooperative groups. The theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 120-141). New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Pfister, H.-R., Wessner, M., Beck-Wilson, J., Miao, Y., & Steinmetz, R. (1998). Rooms, protocols, and nets: Metaphors for
        computer-supported cooperative learning of distributed groups. In A. Bruckman, M. Guzdial, J. L. Kolodner & A.
        Ram (Eds.), Proceedings of ICSL 98 (pp. 242-248). Charlottesville, VA: Association for the Advancement of
        Computing in Education (AACE).
Slavin, R. E. (1995). Cooperative learning: Theory, research, and practice (2nd ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and
        Bacon.
