Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page    583

Coaching Collaboration in a Computer-Mediated Learning
                                                     Environment
María de los Angeles Constantino-González                                        Daniel D. Suthers
           Dept. of Computer Sciences                           Dept. of Information and Computer Sciences
               ITESM Campus Laguna                                        University of Hawai`i at Manoa
          aconstan@campus.lag.itesm.mx                                         suthers@hawaii.edu
ABSTRACT
We  evaluated    a pedagogical    agent  that coaches  collaborative  problem  solving   by tracking   student  participation and
comparing   students'  individual and    group  solutions.  The software   coach  encourages  negotiation  when   differences  are
detected between solutions, and encourages participation in other ways. Evaluations based on expert judgment and on
students' behavior shows that the quality of the advice was good and that the coach helped guide the collaborative session,
although specific areas for improvement were identified.

Keywords
collaborative distance learning, intelligent agents, entity-relationship modeling, socio-cognitive conflict

INTRODUCTION
A  communication     channel   by itself does  not   guarantee  effective collaboration between  distance  learners. Participants
should be guided to help students leverage the advantages of learning with others. Yet it is difficult for human facilitators to
guide many teams working synchronously. Several systems have been designed to guide online synchronous collaboration
(Jermann, Soller & Muehlenbrock, 2001). Most of these systems use restricted menu-driven or sentence-opener interfaces
to track students' dialogue and give guidance based on dialogue models. Wanting an approach that would not excessively
restrict natural   language  interaction  and  would   not  require extensive  knowledge    engineering   for  each  domain,   we
investigated the potential of a basic ability to detect semantically interesting differences between two representations of
problem solutions, coupled with simple tracking of individual's quantity of participation, feedback given, and discussion. A
software coach was designed based on the Socio-Cognitive Conflict and Cognitive Dissonance theories, and implemented
as part of a computer-mediated environment in which students construct Entity-Relationship (ER) diagrams as solutions to
database modeling problems. ER modeling was selected due to its collaborative nature and its use of easily compared
representations. This paper reports on how students used and evaluated the coach's advice.

COLER
COLER (COllaborative Learning environment for Entity-Relationship modeling) is a web-based collaborative learning
environment in which students can solve database-modeling problems. COLER is designed for sessions in which students
first solve problems individually, and then work synchronously in small groups to develop group solutions. A personal
coach    gives advice based  on   conflicts between    the contents of individual  and  group diagrams    and  on imbalances    in
students' participation. Several heuristic control strategies were specified to recognize relevant learning opportunities and to
provide   for  the selection of appropriate    advice. Details  are provided   in Constantino-González     &  Suthers (2001)    or
Constantino-González et al. (2001).

EVALUATION
COLER's performance was judged by comparison to expert judgment, student impressions, and how students responded to
the advice. Five sessions were conducted, each with a different team of three students who were taking or had taken a
database  course.   A domain    expert   also participated. Participants  were located  in  different rooms,   each  containing a
computer with COLER installed and Internet access. Students worked on an ER modeling problem individually for about
30 minutes.    Then  they initiated the   collaborative  session. At the   end of  the  two-hour  session, students  answered   a
questionnaire regarding COLER's performance. The papers cited above reported on evaluations of the quality and coverage
of advice and of the role of various knowledge-sources in generating this advice. This paper focuses on how students used
and evaluated the coach's advice.
COLER's advice was codified according to videotapes and chat transcripts. Advice was codified as Taken if the coached
student performed the action suggested by COLER; Ignored if the coached student didn't follow the advice; Not Longer
Needed    when   the situation changed   just  after the advice  was given;  and  Not   Evaluated when    there was  not enough
information to empirically determine the advice status or when system failures occurred. The students took 40% of the total
advice instances while 28% was ignored. Not Longer Needed advice represented 21% of the total advices, and 11% could
not be evaluated. Overall, students took 59% of the evaluated advice that was still needed at the time it was given. The
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  584

Expert categorized most   of the advice    taken by the students as   "reasonable." Some   ignored  advice was   evaluated  as
reasonable while others as "so-so." Most of the ignored reasonable advice suggested discussion of a difference without
mentioning its specific type. So-so ignored advice was computed because of misspellings in names. Several Feedback and
Continue Task advices, which are based on timeouts, were not longer needed since they were given just when conditions in
the environment changed. This problem can be eliminated by re-checking conditions before giving the selected advice.
Advice rated by students as "useful" included pointing out differences between their solutions, encouraging them to share
and discuss their ideas, to explain their reasoning, and to contribute to the group diagram, and suggesting that they verify
their work when their contribution to the group was different from their own individual work. Advice was generally rated
as useful only when students could do something in response. Almost all of the advice was given at appropriate times;
however, some advice was given just after the action suggested was performed. Most of the students thought that the
presence of a coach during the session helped guide and coordinate the collaborative session and establish the group
dynamics required in collaborative learning. Most students said they reaffirmed their ER knowledge and learned about
collaboration during the session. Some students suggested that more specific advice be given, and that additional types of
messages be included, for example helping to solve the problem, indicating common mistakes in the diagram and giving
feedback on how they are doing. Other students suggested that the coach compare individual solutions and then give
suggestions related to what it finds different. Students also indicated that sometimes advice should be given to the whole
group instead of just to individuals.

CONCLUSIONS
We found that reasonable advice could be generated based primarily on comparing students' individual and group solutions
and on tracking student participation, although some refinements are needed to eliminate sensitivity to spelling errors and
ensure that the advice is still applicable before it is given, and other knowledge sources will help increase the range of
advice given. The approach should generalize to all domains in which students construct formal representations of problem
solutions that can be compared for significant differences.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Constantino-González   was   funded   by ITESM    Campus    Laguna    and by  CONACYT,     and Suthers   was   funded by    the
Presidential Technology Initiative and NSF's Learning and Intelligent Systems. We thank our many colleagues at ITESM
and the University of Pittsburgh for their collaboration and support.

REFERENCES
Constantino-González,  M.  A.,   Suthers,  D. D.  &  Icaza, J. (2001).  Designing   and  Evaluating  a Collaboration  Coach:
        Knowledge    and  Reasoning.    In J. D.  Moore, C.  L.  Redfield,  W.  L.  Johnson  (Eds.) Artificial Intelligence in
        Education, Proc. 10th Conference on AI-ED, San Antonio Texas, May 19-23 2001, Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp.
        176-187.
Constantino-González, M. A., & Suthers, D. D. (2001). Coaching Collaboration by Comparing Solutions and Tracking
        Participation. In P. Dillenbourg,     A. Eurelings, K.  Hakkarainen   (Eds.) European   Perspectives   on Computer-
        Supported Collaborative Learning, Proc. First European Conference on CSCL, Universiteit Maastricht, Maastrict,
        the Netherlands, March 22-24 2001, pp. 173-180.
Jermann, P., Soller, A., & Muehlenbrock, M. (2001). From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of the Art Technology
        for Supporting    Collaborative   Learning. In  P.  Dillenbourg,   A. Eurelings,  K. Hakkarainen   (Eds.)  European
        Perspectives   on Computer-Supported      Collaborative  Learning,    Proc. First European   Conference    on CSCL,
        Universiteit Maastricht, Maastrict, the Netherlands, March 22-24 2001, pp. 324-331.
