Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page 585

        Analyzing Sequential Data in Computer-Supported
                                        Collaborative Learning
                                         Dietmar Janetzko1, Frank Fischer2
           1Institute of Computer Science and Social Research, University of Freiburg, Germany
                                        dietmar@cognition.iig.uni-freiburg.de
                           2Institute of Psychology, University of Tübingen, Germany
                                             frank.fischer@iwm-kmrc.de
ABSTRACT
Representations and changes between them play a major role in cognitive development (e.g., Vosniadou, & Brewer, 1992)
and education (e.g., Hewson, Beeth, & Thorley, 1998). By definition, change of representations is also indispensable for
collaborative work since a common understanding or shared knowledge can only be achieved by a partial convergence of
the knowledge structures of the collaborating subjects. This articles presents and discusses knowledge tracking (KT), viz.,
an approach to analyze cognition on the basis of symbolic sequential data. We present and discuss the methodological
aspects of  KT and   delineate  the Web-based   computer   program     (knowledge     tracking engine, KTE)      set up  to run KT-
analyses (http://www.knowledge-tracking.com). An empirical study in collaborative learning is taken to exemplify the
usage of KT in analysis of computer supported collaboration.

Keywords
Shared knowledge, network representation of cognition, probabilistic model, change of representation, sequential data

KNOWLEDGE TRACKING
Knowledge tracking (KT) is a psychometric method that carries out a diagnosis of cognitive representations. Knowledge
tracking can be used in a confirmative or in a generative mode. The former provides a rationale to decide which of some
candidate  theories (relational structures) explains  a sequence    of data  best.(1) The  latter may  be pursued     to   generate a
relational structure on the basis of some start-up structures such that the newly generated structure fits to the data best
(Janetzko, 2000).
The Data: Sequence of Concepts. The input of data required by knowledge tracking is a sequence of symbols or concepts
(e.g., the sequence of the concepts CAT, DOG, FISH, MOUSE etc.) that refer to the sequence of states in a Markov
process. This kind of data may be easily obtained in studies of computer supported collaboration or think aloud studies.
The Theory: Relations and Structures. Knowledge tracking needs a theory to analyze sequences of symbolic data. To
specify a theory we have to select one or many simple semantic relations (e.g., x         is-a    y or x  communicates           to
y). On the basis of a relation we may then add a set of concepts that are taken to instantiate the relations. We end up with
relational structures. A  very  simple   relational structure can   be  described in    a Lisp-like  notation    as  (is-a  (MOUSE
MAMMAL)        (HORSE      MAMMAL)         (SHARK     FISH)    (HERRING       FISH)     (FISH     VERTEBRATE)           (MAMMAL
VERTEBRATE)).
Calculating  Goodness   of Fit  Scores.  In KT, the   theory, viz., one   or many     relational  structures, is taken  to  calculate
goodness of fit scores on the basis of sequences of symbolic data. A goodness of fit score describes how well a sequence of
symbolic data can be explained by a relational structure.

The Knowledge Tracking Engine: Using Knowledge Tracking via the WWW
The web-site http://www.knowledge-tracking.com allows visitors to carry out remote analyses of data on the
basis of the knowledge tracking engine (KTE). Users may upload data and theories and use KT either in the confirmative or
in the generative mode.

USAGE OF KNOWLEDGE TRACKING TO ANALYSE SHARED KNOWLEDGE
Recent work in CSCL indicates that knowledge convergence in collaborative learning might be an important factor for
conceptual change (Roschelle, 1995). Knowledge convergence could be defined as the increasing similarity of subjects with
regard  to process  and outcome   of knowledge      construction (Fischer &   Mandl,   2001).    We  investigated,   to what   extent
collaborators converge   with   respect to process  and outcomes    of problem-oriented    collaborative  learning    in   text-based
computer-mediated communication. Moreover, we compared two different instructional conditions with regard to their
effects on  knowledge   convergence.    Both conditions   were   structured  by a specific     type of collaboration    script  (e.g.,

(1) By explanation we refer to the theory-based prediction of data.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 586

O'Donnell, 1996): A macroscript mainly sets a common goal and prescribes major steps. In contrast, a microscript is more
fine-grained in regulating the learners interaction.
Participants and design. We re-analyzed data of 18 subjects from a recent study (Reiserer, Ertl, Weinberger, Fischer,
Mandl, & Jahn, in press). Subjects worked together in distributed groups of three learners (triads) in one of the two
different script conditions of a one-factorial design.
Procedure. Learners worked on standard personal computers with 400Mhz and 128 MB RAM located in separated places.
They communicated via text-based CMC facilities. The main components of the learning environment were a text-based
computer conferencing system and a video lecture.
Results. As data sources we used transcripts of the discourse of the learner as well as learners` text production in the pre-
test and in the post-test. In so doing, we identified all scientific concepts explicitly stated or paraphrased in the students'
essays in the sequence of their occurrence. Thus, data were simply sequences of concepts, which is a format easily to be
analyzed via    knowledge tracking. First, we conducted      a comparison  between results from   the pre-test  and post-test
(analyzed via the expert structure) and the random structure. There was a significant difference between the pre-test and
random structure (z-= - 1,67; p< .05) as well as the post-test and the random structure (z =-2,54, p< 0.005) of both groups
and the  random   structure, showing that  subjects    had prior knowledge that clearly increased during the    collaboration.
Second, we assessed the degree of convergence that was initiated by either the microscript or the macroscript condition. To
assess convergence of knowledge we used the structures derived from traces (generative mode of KT) of subjects of each
triad to analyze the traces of subjects of each triad (confirmative mode of KT) avoiding of course circular assessments. In
this way, scores for the convergence of knowledge in the microscript and the macroscript condition were determined. A
comparison of both script conditions revealed a marginally significant difference in favour of the macroscript condition (z =
- 1,47 p< .07).

REFERENCES
Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (2001). Facilitating the construction of shared knowledge with graphical representation
         tools in face-to-face and computer-mediated scenarios. In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings & K. Hakkarainen
         (Eds.), European Perspectives on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp.230-236). Maastricht:
         McLuhan Institute.
Hewson, P. W., Beeth, M. E., & Thorley, N. R. (1998). Teaching for conceptual change. In . G. Tobin & B. J.
         Fraser (Eds.), International handbook of science education (pp. 99-218). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Janetzko, D. (2000). Selecting and generating concept structures. In R. Roy (Ed.), Knowledge management - A
         micro-level approach. London: Springer.
O'Donnell, A. (1996). Effects of explicit incentives on scripted and unscripted cooperation. Journal of Educational
         Psychology, 88 (1), 74-86.
Reiserer, M., Weinberger, A., Ertl, B., Fischer, F., Mandl, H., & Jahn, K. (in press). Scripted collaborative
         learning in text-based computer-mediated communication - A pilot study (Research report 140). Munich:
         University of Munich.
Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by Collaborating: Convergent Conceptual Change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL:
         Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 209-248). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of the earth: A study of conceptual
         change in childhood. Cognitive Psychology, 24(4), 535-585.
