Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page  587

      Evolving Shared Experience in Distributed Learning
                                                   Environments
                                                    Grégory Bourguin
                                             CUEEP/Laboratoire TRIGONE
                                       Lille University of Science and Technology
                                             gregory.bourguin@univ-lille1.fr
                                                      Anders Mørch
                                                          InterMedia
                                                      University of Oslo
                                           anders.morch@intermedia.uio.no
ABSTRACT
Distributed learning environments such as groupware give two or more users the means for working together remotely on a
shared task. This activity is more than the sum of single users working on their own to solve the same task. Although most
people will agree about this, there is neither agreement nor much discussion in the literature on how coordination and
collaboration skill should be distributed between users and computer tools. We present a new approach that uses a process
model adapted    from     Activity theory to guide    our efforts. The    model outlines steps  towards capturing    crystallised
experience.

Keywords
Distributed learning environments, shared experience, crystallized experience, Activity theory, end-user tailorability

INTRODUCTION
Certain actions like negotiating how to work and coordinating disjoint contributions distinguish group work from the work
of single users. User experience is an important asset in individual work. In this article we address user experience in
distributed settings and   we  ask  the  following  questions:  What   is shared experience  and   how  can it  be  useful when
collaborating in remote     settings?  Our  working   hypothesis   is that shared  experience   will be useful   for supporting
collaboration and coordination      in distributed environments.   Our  experience  is based on   previous  studies  in building
(Bourguin and Derycke, 2001) and testing (Wasson and Mørch, 2000) single-user and multi-user systems in different
settings. The convergence of our ideas, which has evolved independently in two different laboratories, suggests that our
approach may apply to other settings as well.

BASIC CONCEPTS AND PROCESS MODEL
We have adapted a set of concepts from Activity Theory (AT) and Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL).
The rationale for this is to help us understand and explain the processes leading to crystallization (as a collaborative
activity) and crystallized experience (a system property). Crystallized experience is externalized user (mental) experience
materialized in physical artifacts. This is a result of a crystallization process, which in its final stage entails end-user
tailoring of a computer system.
The concepts we adopt are the following: breakdown, reflection, knowledge building, and crystallisation. A breakdown
according to AT is an inability to reach the object of the activity. After a breakdown the participants may have to switch to
another level of participation in order to continue, which we call reflection. Reflection is an activity on a different level of
abstraction than the activity that triggered the reflection. We call the former meta-level activity and the latter base activity.
At the meta-level, reflection on the base activity is possible.
A person uses his internal (mental) experience for understanding the breakdown and its cause, and (if successful) is able to
determine an approach for resolving it. In a cooperative work setting, the meta-activity may itself become the topic of a
cooperative  activity. When   internal  experience  (reflection) is accompanied    or  replaced by public  talk (debate),  group
discussion, or other means to externalizing the breakdown situation we refer to this as belonging to the realm of knowledge
building, a  concept   and  process    introduced  by Scardemalia     and Bereiter (1996). The   meta-activity  may   lead  to a
transformation of the activity's context. This may result in a reformulation of the task and its elements (object, tools, rules,
division of labor, etc.).
In this paper we are primarily concerned with the transformation of tools. However, a tool will often (implicitly) contain a
built-in representation of the rules and the division of labor of the activity in which the tool is used. Resolving a breakdown
by implementing a work-around inside the tool that caused the breakdown is at the hart of the approach to shared user
experience we pursue in this paper. When users are able to modify a tool, this is to a large extent a result of their past
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  588

experiences   (in designing    and using   similar tools). Modifications will   thus reflect its users' experience.   Crystallised
experience is shared experience materialised inside a transformed tool. A second goal is to be able to reuse and disseminate
crystallised experience in new user activities. As new users reuse a (modified) tool the experience crystallised inside it is
also reused. New users may encounter breakdowns and this may require further adaptation of the tool, which again will
bring new experiences to the fore. Only to the extent that these experiences are identified, externalised, crystallised and
made available as (materialized) parts inside tools can they have a lasting value.

DESIGN ISSUES
A computer system is an artefact supporting some users' activities. We want to create systems that will allow other users to
adapt it to their needs by building on the previous users' crystallized experience. From our point of view, each system
adaptation contains some amount of experience from its users. We want to develop CSCL environments that can capture
user experience useful for collaboration and coordination in groups in the context of distributed collaborative learning. For
end users  to  be able   to participate in the crystallization process computer    tools   have  to be adaptable   during use, i.e.
supporting end-user tailorability (Mørch, 1997). However, the creation of a tailorable system is not a simple problem. We
believe that a balance have to be found between users' motivation for realising a modification task and the computational
effort to be expended by them for understanding the problem and solving it. First, we need to create a system with an
understandable foundation as seen from the users point of view. Second, we want to realise this with existing technology.
We have therefore embarked on a component software approach (Szyperski, 1997) for building end-user tailorable systems
because one of the biggest obstacles to understanding computer systems is a lack of building blocks that match the users'
cognitive thought processes. A framework for this is called DARE (Distributed Activities in a Reflective Environment)
(Bourguin G., Derycke A., 2001). DARE proposes a global platform for CSCW allowing users to adapt their working
environment at runtime. Users' adaptations are made on task, tool, and role components. According to the processes and
concepts described above, we believe that DARE users' experience is crystallised inside the components they adapt while
using it.

DISCUSSION
We have embarked on a cumbersome journey from two different starting points. One the one end, we have identified the
importance  of user  experience    for  understanding  the  design and use   of tools and   shared  (crystallized) experience  for
communication and collaboration in distributed settings. One the other end, we have developed a solution framework
(DARE) for building computational support for crystallized experience. We have not yet completed our journey and the
two paths do not join. However, we have adopted and further developed a set of concepts and distinctions we hope can be
useful for other researchers in CSCL and CSCW. We strongly believe that for shared experience to have a lasting value it
must be tightly integrated with the artifacts that mediate collaboration. A long-term goal of our work is to record experience
that captures domain-oriented base activity and not only the experience for building and tailoring the systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The first author would like to thank the members of the DARE project at the TRIGONE lab at USTL. The second author
would like to thank the members of the DoCTA NSS project at the Universities in Bergen and Oslo.

REFERENCES
Bourguin   G., Derycke      A. (2001),  Integrating  the   CSCL   Activities into  Virtual   Campuses:   Foundations   of  a   new
          Infrastructure for   Distributed Collective Activities.  Proceedings  of   First European    Conference  on Computer-
          Supported  Collaborative      Learning   (Euro-CSCL   2001),   Maastricht,  the    Netherlands, March     22-24,  Pierre
          Dillenbourg et al. eds., pp. 123-130.
Mørch, A. (1997), Three Levels of End-User Tailoring: Customization, Integration, and Extension. In Computers and
          Design in Context. M. Kyng & L. Mathiassen (eds.). The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 51-76.
Scardamalia, M. & C. Bereiter (1996), Computer support for knowledge-building communities in T. Koschmann, ed., In
          CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah NJ, USA, pp. 249-268.
Szyperski, C. (1997), Component Software: Beyond Object-Oriented Programming. Addison-Wesley.
Wasson, B. and Mørch, A. (2000), Identifying Collaboration Patterns in Collaborative Telelearning Scenarios. Educational
          Technology & Society 3(3).
