Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                    page  589

         Modelling and Supporting Learning Activities in a
                               Computer-integrated Classroom
                                                Andreas Lingnau, Ulrich Hoppe
                                                University of Duisburg, Germany
                                            {lingnau,hoppe}@informatik.uni-duisburg.de

ABSTRACT
We have implemented ubiquitous computing technology in a primary school setting to support rich classroom activities
particularly in the field of early literacy. After initial tests have corroborated the benefit of this technology with respect to
attaining curricular goals and to better supporting learner-centred classroom methodologies, we are now exploring specific
intelligent  support  mechanisms,     e.g.,  to inform   participants   - both teachers  and pupils   - about  automatically assessed
learning opportunities.

Keywords
Early learning, literacy, intelligent support, collaborative learning analysis, ubiquitous computing

INTRODUCTION
Computer supported collaborative learning is often identified with "virtual learning" in distance scenarios. In contrast to
this, we have pursued the idea of enriching face-to-face classroom situations with embedded computing technologies. The
technological approach was deliberately subordinated to grown curricular goals and pedagogical traditions. Recently, we
have been    able  to demonstrate     the   benefits of  such    "computer  integrated  classrooms"   in a specific learning  domain
(Tewissen et al., 2001). In this paper, we elaborate how specific forms of online support can be generated in computerised
classroom environments. The classroom as such is a collaborative scenario with different roles (e.g., teachers, learners, peer
helpers) and resources (network, archives, software tools, physical devices). In our view, automatic support functions are
not meant to guide and control classroom learning processes globally but to locally enrich the situation, e.g., by informing
participants about learning opportunities and affordances.
Within   the European    NIMIS    project    ("Networked     Interactive
Media   in   Schools",  cf. NIMIS,     1998),    computer    integrated
classrooms   have   been   set up   in associated    primary   schools.
Both    hardware    selection    and  software    design     have   been
orientated   towards   the  special   needs   of early   learners.  The
classroom    design   was   based    on   principles    of  "ubiquitous
computing"   (Weiser,   1991)    (Fig. 1).  To   give   the pupils  easy
access   to  our   computing     facilities a   special  JAVA      based
software    has been   developed     which    replaces   the  Windows
desktop. As a standard mode the desktop supports partner work
by allowing     two   children to be   logged    in  at a   time at one
workplace.
The  concept    of  a "computer    integrated    classroom"   (CiC)    is
essentially targeted at fostering collaboration between pupils. In
Duisburg, the focus was set on the process of learning how toreadandwrite.Adaptinganewmethodcalled"LesendurchSchreiben" (Engl.: Reading Through Writing, RTW) which wasFig.1TheNIMISclassroominDuisburg
originally   introduced  in Switzerland      (Reichen,     1991)   the application T³   ("Today's Talking     Typewriter")   has been
developed. It is a phonetics based approach for teaching reading and writing. Pupils get access to the complete range of
phonemes in the form of a palette with letters from the very beginning. Thus children are able to write words by combining
letters from  a  "phoneme     table",  even   though    they are   not yet able to read. In  abstract   terms RTW   inverts  the usual
sequencing of the analytic task of de-coding (reading) and synthetic task of encoding (writing). T³ is designed for usage
with pen    based  interactive   screens  and   behaves    similar to  the known   procedure with   pencil and  paper in  the normal
classroom. (Fig. 2, cf. Tewissen et al., 2000).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 590

INTELLIGENT SUPPORT
T³ is enhanced to provide two different kinds of intelligent support,
using the  Support Agent    Architecture  developed   by Prada   et al.
(2000). It facilitates intelligent agents  which  are   not explicitly
visualised but functionally embedded in the T³ workspace.

Phonetic diagnosis
To provide automatic support for the children's' phonetic writing it is
important that target words are known by the system. (In phonetic
writing, it is practically impossible to infer a target word from only
two or three starting letters.) If a target word is known, a phonetic
diagnosis  can  be   performed  by    comparison  which    allows   for       Fig. 2 Phonetic writing with T³
sophisticated  forms   of intelligent feedback.  T³   provides a  pre-
selection of target words on so called "theme pages". The phonetic
comparison between the target word and the writing product of the child is done by an algorithm that is based on a phonetic
classification. It detects incorrect substitutions, missing and "wrong" phonemes.

Writing Support
There are two different intelligent agents in T³. Both use the phonetic diagnostic algorithm. The first agent provides an
embedded, "implicit" feedback during the writing process. Depending on the learning phase, the writing agent will first
only analyse phonemes which are clearly pronounced and later also those which are not emphasised. The agent gives hints
by "moving" the letters in the workspace to form a gap at the position where a phoneme is missing.
The second kind of support offers a selection of "peer experts" to those children who have problems detecting correct
phonemes in a target word. The phonetic diagnosis determines the correctness values from the content of the workspace. If
the score of the writing result exceeds a predefined limit the information is stored in a database. From this database, peer
helpers will be selected according to their specific strengths. The mediation of peer helper is based on the methodology of
"multiple student modelling" (Hoppe, 1995). The offer of peer helpers stimulates collaboration, which can take place
outside the system in the classroom (by natural face-to-face communication) as well as inside the system in a special
collaborative mode of T³.

PERSPECTIVES
The intelligent support will be evaluated and improved in close cooperation with teachers. The indicators for the different
stages of writing skills will be tested and checked against the teachers' expectations and observations in the classroom. A
specific challenge lies in determining the point in time when learners start to read. This is particularly difficult since the
overt actions in the system are only writing actions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Parts of this work has been funded by the European Esprit project No. 29301, "NIMIS". We thank our NIMIS partners and
especially the teachers and pupils of the associated schools for their participation and creative input.

REFERENCES
Hoppe, H.U. (1995). Using multiple student modeling to parameterize group learning. In Proc. of AI-ED '95, 234-241,
        Washington D.C., August 1995: AACE.
Prada, R., Machado, I. & Paiva, A. (2000) TEATRIX: Virtual Environment for Story Creation. In Proc. of ITS 2000, 464-
        473, Montreal, June 2000: Springer.
Reichen, J. (1991). Lesen durch Schreiben. ("Reading through Writing"). Zürich, Switzerland: Sabe
Tewissen, F., Lingnau, A. & Hoppe, H.U. (2000). "Today's Talking Typewriter" Supporting Early Literacy in a Classroom
        Environment. In Proc. of ITS 2000, 252-261, Montreal, June 2000: Springer.
Tewissen,  F., Hoppe,   H.U., Lingnau,   A., Mannhaupt,   G.,  Nischk,  D. (2001).  Collaborative Writing     in a Computer-
        integrated Classroom for Early Learning. In Proc. of E-CSCL 2001, Maastricht, Netherlands, March 2001.
Weiser, M. (1991). The computer for the 21st century. Scientific American 9/91, 66-75.
