Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  593

Advancing Understanding of Learning in Interaction: How
   Ways of Participating Can Influence Joint Performance
                                                 and Learning
                                              Brigid Barron, David Sears
                                                     Stanford University
                                                   barronbj@stanford.edu

ABSTRACT
An enduring issue for CSCL researchers involves developing methods of assessing collaborative interaction and tracing the
quality of collaboration to learning outcomes. One critical question for research is whether we can identify relational and/or
interactional resources that are important for generative collaboration. In this presentation, we will share research that
examined the relationship between student interactions, group success, and subsequent individual performance on the same
and a related problem solving measure.

Keywords
Alignment of goals, mutuality in interaction, joint attention, transfer of learning, quality of collaboration.

INTRODUCTION
Success  in joint endeavors is   often attributed  to   the knowledge-base  resources that individuals   uniquely       bring to a
collaborative situation. While individual resources are essential, recent research suggests that attention must also be paid to
the ecology of relations that develops within interactions that make it possible (or not) for knowledge and other cognitive
resources to be accessed, functionally expressed, and shared among group members. A number of accounts suggest that the
quality and  nature of collaboration   within groups    can differ even given objectively similar situations,    and    that  while
interactions emerge over time, and fluctuate on a moment-by moment basis, they can also be characterized broadly as
falling on a continuum of productive interdependence. For example, Forman & Cazden (1985) found that different patterns
of interaction emerged even given the same problem to solve. They described three styles of working together, "Parallel,"
"Associative,"  and "Cooperative,"   that evolved    in the  context of Piagetian isolation-of-variables problems       and   were
characterized by increasing degrees of coordination. These findings point to a need to articulate further the dimensions of
interaction and their  potential consequences.   The  current  research focuses on  the relationship between        the quality  of
interaction (as indicated by responses to solution proposals), group performance, and learning outcomes in the context of a
mathematical problem solving activity.

METHODS
Participants
The data set includes twelve groups of high-achieving sixth grade students whose scores on the problem formed a bi-modal
distribution. Triads were composed of same gender participants.
Materials and Procedures
The first episode in a series called The Adventures of Jasper Woodbury (Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt,
1997) provided the mathematical problem-solving task used in this study. In order to solve the problem, students had to
collect data embedded in the video presentation. Students solved the problem in same-gender groups of three. (see Barron,
2000a,b; Sears, Barron, & Strobel, 2001 for more detail).

RESULTS
Analysis of Response Patterns
The results from our coding of group interactions address two main questions: 1) Do the pattern of responses to correct
proposals of students in successful and unsuccessful groups differ significantly; and 2) Do the pattern of response pairs
differ significantly according to group success? All responses to correct proposals were categorized as engaged responses
or non-engaged.   Engaged responses    took   up the  proposal  in conversation and accepted or   discussed     it. Non-engaged
responses included no verbal response or rejection of the proposal without rationale. As shown in Table 1, Chi square
analyses indicated that successful groups made significantly more Engaged responses and significantly less Non-Engaged
responses than unsuccessful groups, (Chi sq. (1) = 22.2, p = .000). Independent t-tests revealed that the proportion of
Engaged  responses  produced     by successful   groups (M(7)   =  66.46% (±7.47%))   was  significantly higher      than that   of
unsuccessful groups (M(4) = 41.75% (±26.04%), t = 5.904, p < .05). Thus, our analyses suggest that the groups did differ
significantly, and in the direction that one would expect. It is interesting to note that the proportions are nearly inverted,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 594

with successful groups producing a fairly high rate of Engaged responses (66.46%) while unsuccessful groups produce a
fairly high rate of Non-Engaged responses (58.75%).
In addition to looking at individual responses to correct proposals, we examined response pairs. It is important to realize
that when people work in groups, often one person's response is taken to be the group's response, especially if the other
group members remain silent. Thus, to determine whether responses to correct proposals were different at the group level
(e.g. both partners) and not just at the individual level between successful and unsuccessful groups, we examined response
pairs. Chi square analysis indicated that successful groups and unsuccessful groups differed in their production of pair types
(Engage & Engage, Engage & Non-Engage, or Non-Engage & Non-Engage), (Chi sq. (2) = 24.9, p = .000). An independent
t-test indicated that the successful groups   (M (7) = 3.47%     (±6.05%))  produced a  trend toward   a significantly lower
proportion of Non-Engage & Non-Engage response pairs than unsuccessful groups (M (4) = 30.46% (±35.31%)), (t(1) =
4.215, p = .07). The differences between the two other possible response pairs were not significant. Thus, these results
suggest that one characteristic of the interactions of unsuccessful groups includes a lack of responsiveness or reciprocity.
Again, it is worth noting the magnitude of the difference in this lack of give and take between unsuccessful and successful
groups. As shown by the percentages above, the proportion of Non-Engage response pairs produced by unsuccessful groups
was nearly 10 times greater than the proportion produced by successful groups.

Mastery and Transfer Performance
Independent   t-tests revealed that  students in  successful    groups  performed significantly better   than their peers  in
unsuccessful groups on both the mastery test (Msuccessful (7) = 96.8% (±14.6%), Munsuccessful (4) = 68.1% (±32.2%), t = -3.53, p
= 0.0013, df = 31) and the transfer test (Msuccessful (7) = 93.6% (±16.3%), Munsuccessful (4) = 73.7% (±32.9%), t = -2.34, p =
0.026, df = 31). Thus, we can see that students in successful groups showed more Engaged responses as well as greater
performance.

CONCLUSION
These results suggest that better collaboration, as measured by the production and acceptance of correct proposals, is
associated with  group  performance  and greater  individual   learning. To advance  research on  CSCL    issues we  need  to
continue to define features of interaction that are linked to qualities of mutual engagement, quality of joint work, and
individual learning. This work is a step in that direction.

REFERENCES
Barron,  B.J. (2000a).  Problem  solving in   video-based    microworlds: Collaborative and   individual outcomes   of   high-
         achieving sixth-grade students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 391-398.
Barron, B. (2000b). Achieving coordination in collaborative problem solving groups. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
         9(4), 403-436.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (1997). The Jasper Project. Lessons in curriculum, instruction, assessment,
         and professional development. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Forman & Cazden (1985). Exploring Vygotskian perspectives in education: The cognitive value of peer interaction. In J.V.
         Wertsch   (Ed.), Culture, communication,    and    cognition: Vygotskian perspectives  (pp. 323-347).   New   York:
         Cambridge University Press.
Sears, D.A., Barron, B., & Strobel, K.R.(2000). Coding collaborative interactions in a math setting: Attempting to identify
         discourse patterns that lead to group acceptance of correct proposals. Paper presented at the American Educational
         Research Association (AERA) Conference, Seattle, WA, April 2001.
