Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  595

         Supporting Children's Collaborative Authoring:
 Practicing Written Literacy While Composing Oral Texts
                                                      Mike Ananny
                                                  Media Laboratory,
                                       Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                                ananny@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper presents the theory, design and evaluation of a new type of computer-supported collaborative interface intended
to help young children practice certain oral language skills critical for later written literacy acquisition. Based on a theory of
"emergent literacy", this paper describes a toy ­ TellTale ­ designed to let young children create, share and edit oral
language in a way similar to how they will eventually create written language. Two user studies were conducted. The first
suggests that paired children of different SES use different social and linguistic strategies to establish cohesion and that
purely syntactic measures of narrative coherence are not sensitive enough to describe children's collaborative language
play. A second pilot study investigated how groups of children used TellTale. Although results are not conclusive, TellTale
also seems to be an engaging interface for group authorship.

Keywords
Emergent literacy, collaboration, authoring, language, play, toys, socio-economic strata.

INTRODUCTION
Old distinctions between collaborative learning, group play and language instruction are changing as both digital media and
our relationship with technology evolve. By carefully designing technology-enhanced language toys that give children
control over both the structure and content of their language, young children may be able to engage in literacy activities
previously thought to be too advanced for their age. This research addresses a particular aspect of this new opportunity.
Specifically, it claims that a tangible technology-enhanced toy ­ TellTale ­ that supports collaborative construction of oral
language can help children practice certain skills crucial for later written literacy. TellTale's interface is designed to support
"externalized meaning-making"  (Wells,      1981)  and   "emergent   literacy"     (Whitehurst  and    Lonigan,   1998)    through
collaborative oral story construction.

TELLTALE: A TOY TO SUPPORT COLLABORATIVE LANGUAGE PLAY
                                                      TellTale  (shown  at left)   is a  caterpillar-like toy  with five   modular,
                                                      colored body pieces and a head. Children can press a button on each
                                                      of the five body pieces to record 20 seconds of audio into that body
                                                      piece. The child can then play back that audio by pressing the body
                                                      piece's record button. The body pieces detach from each another and
                                                      can be arranged and rearranged in any order. At any point the child
                                                      can attach the toy's head to the body in order to hear the entire story
                                                      (i.e. the audio  recorded     into each  of the     five pieces)  played  in
                                                      sequence. The child can also record over the audio in any body piece
                                                      at any  time. All body   pieces    are identical    in functionality and are
designed to help children reflect upon the structure and content of their stories.

EVALUATING TELLTALE: TWO STUDIES
While an earlier study (Ananny &       Cassell, 2001) found   that TellTale's  segmented     interface    successfully encourages
individual children to create cohesive narratives, the two studies described here were designed to investigate how children
use TellTale during collaborative language play. Due to space restrictions, only very brief descriptions of both studies are
given here. For a complete presentation of both studies, please see the on-line version of this paper.

User study #1: TellTale and Paired Authorship
The goal of this study was to investigate the specific kinds of collaborative techniques paired children use to establish
coherence within a jointly-authored TellTale story and, secondarily, how children of different socio-economic strata (SES)
may use different strategies to establish narrative cohesion. A total of 22 native-English speaking children (5 low-SES
dyads, 6 high-SES dyads) ranging in age from 6,1 to 7,6 participated in the study.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page 596

Overall, children   from   different socio-economic     strata tended  to   engage  in  different  behaviors  during   collaborative
storytelling. An initial analysis of only the quantitative data may interpret low-SES children's high percentage of co-
occurring utterances and low percentage of syntactic connectives as an indication that they are less able to engage in good
turn-taking behavior and that they are less aware of their co-participant. But the qualitative data suggest that this may not be
the case for two reasons: low-SES children appear to be using more subtle (e.g. non-syntactic, paralinguistic and non-
verbal)  strategies to indicate   turn-taking  during  story  construction. Also,   despite  the high   percentage  of co-occurring
utterances in low-SES children's recordings, these children consistently incorporated elements of their partner's utterances
concurrently. In    contrast, children from    high-SES  tended   to establish  coherence    using syntactic  connectives  between
consecutive recordings.
The location  of   conjunctive   phrases also   suggests an   interesting new  finding. In   both  high- and  low-SES    conditions,
children were more likely to use connectives to link the beginning of their recordings to the previous recording and less
likely to use connectives to link the end of the recording to the subsequent recording. This reliable pattern suggests that,
when children are establishing narrative coherence, they may be more focused on linking with previous content than
planning for coherence with future content.

User Study #2: TellTale and Group Authorship (A Pilot)
Although  this   study  was    only  a   pilot investigation,  several interesting   observations   were   made    about  children's
collaborative language play with TellTale. A total of 7 children in two groups participated in this study: four 7-year old
girls in one group; three brothers aged 3, 5 and 7 in the second group.
In both groups, children worked together to build stories. Children frequently debated exactly what should be recorded in
each body piece. At one point in the 7-year old girls' group, the story became complex and there was much debate over
exactly what should be said in the fourth body piece. One child wrote with a crayon on a piece of paper exactly what she
thought  should  be   said ­  "so  we'll know    for sure" ­   indicating that these  children   were   comfortable mixing   written
authorship with oral storytelling during the play session. In the other session, a 7-year old creatively used TellTale to solve
his brothers' problem. After the 5-year old and the 3-year old had recorded into four of the five body pieces, they expressed
concern that there was only one body piece left. The 7-year old brother then held down the record button on the fifth body
piece while playing back the first four. In effect, he "copied" the first four body pieces into the fifth, freeing four body
pieces for new audio.

CONCLUSION
While   TellTale supports     only certain kinds  of  language   play, its  design  and evaluation    suggest that  there is a new
opportunity to use media technology to support children's emergent literacy development and collaborative play. One user
study found   that  children  of different socio-economic     strata use  different strategies  to establish cohesion  during  joint
construction of oral stories; and that children's use of conjunctive phrases may indicate a preference to link with previous
content over planning for future content. A second pilot study suggests that TellTale may also support authorship among
more than two children.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to Professor Hiroshi Ishii and Professor Justine Cassell for their collaborative guidance. Thanks also to Dr.
Bakhtiar Mikhak     and  Jean  Barnwell    for  help thinking  through    and building  this project.   This work   was  generously
supported by LEGO and the MIT Media Laboratory's Things That Think and Digital Life consortia.

REFERENCES
Ananny,  M.   &    J. Cassell  (2001).   "TellTale:  A   toy  to encourage    written  literacy  skills through oral   storytelling."
         Presentation at Winter Conference on Text, Discourse & Cognition, Jackson, USA. January 28-30, 2001.
Wells, G. (1981). "Language, literacy and education." In Wells, G. (Ed.), Language Through Interaction. Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press.
Whitehurst,G.&C.Lonigan(1998)."Child development and emergent literacy."Child Development 69(3),pp.848-872.
