Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 597

     Using "Thinking Tags" with Kindergarten Children: A
                                      Dental Health Simulation
                           Gail Andrews, Kimberley A. MacKinnon, Susan Yoon
             Ontario Institute for Studies in Education at the University of Toronto (OISE/UT)
         gsandrews@oise.utoronto.ca, kmackinnon@oise.utoronto.ca & syoon@oise.utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
According to many dental professionals, the decay effects from the accumulation of sugar on teeth are a very difficult
concept for young children to learn. Playing the dental hygiene game with Thinking Tags not only brings context into the
classroom,   but allows  children  to work  with   digital maipulatives  that provide  instant feedback. Instead  of watching  a
demonstration of the accumulation of sugars on a screen or being told about dental health, this simulation allows 5-year old
children  to experience    improving    or decaying     dental  health  without  any   real adverse  effects. Small,   wearable,
microprocessor-driven    tags  were   brought   into the   kindergarten classroom  to  simulate  the decay    process, providing
information and creating a discussion about teeth. This program was effective and enthusiastically received by this age
group.

Keywords
Science, technology, thinking tags, dental health, participatory simulation, discourse

INTRODUCTION
The principles of situated learning are that a) knowledge needs to be presented in an authentic context, and that b) learning
entails social interaction and collaboration (Lave, 1999). An example of applied situated learning psychology is a Thinking
Tags game designed to show children the concept of accumulation. Building on this basic concept, children are able to learn
that sugar on the teeth can accumulate and over time cause tooth decay. Many dental professionals believe that this concept
is thought  to be  too  difficult for children  to comprehend.   In fact, the  Canadian  Dental  Association  recommends      that
children at this age should not be responsible for their own dental care (CDHA, 2000). Although the values of brushing are
taught at this age, basic science concepts, which lie behind dental health, are not readily taught to this age group. Apart
from an underdeveloped level of responsibility, it may be presumed that children are not able to grasp the complex concept
of interactions of sugar on the teeth over time, which can cause cavities.
Resnick, Berg & Eisenberg, (2000) show that a constructionist "scientific instrument design has the potential to spark
interest in  scientific issues among    students   who  otherwise  avoid  the  subject altogether".  We  aim   to show   that by
concentrating on the most basic ideas relating to accumulation and applying the pedagogy of situated learning, we can
successfully teach this difficult concept to children as young as five.

THINKING TAGS AND DENTAL HEALTH
The MIT Media Laboratory has been at work developing small wearable microcomputers called Thinking Tags (Tags).
These Tags are about the size of a name badge and are equipped with infrared ports and sensors, lights and a small display
panel. With these tags, children are given the opportunity to concretely explore abstract scientific ideas. Furthermore,
studies with digital robotic bricks show students using the bricks were required to examine classic feedback strategies,
which they might not otherwise formally investigate until university (Resnick, 1998). This exploration of feedback and
emergence allows insight into scientific thinking, the basic building blocks for activities such as data collection and control.
Digital manipulative objects can be also be programmed to demonstrate interactive behaviours. When programmed in this
way, digital tools, like children's mechanical structures and toy model sets before them, provide insight into the type of
interactive behaviour from which more complex systems arise (Resnick, Martin, Berg, Borovoy, Colella, Kramer, and
Silverman, 1998). Due to its ability to allow students to explore feedback, emergence and control, this area of research may
have many    potential  educational   benefits. Digital  tools can help  students learn complex    concepts   by  breaking  those
concepts down into basic levels and observing the behaviours that arise from these simple interactions. Students have the
ability to tackle these concepts well before they are ready to learn them in an abstract, formalized educational setting. It is
necessary then, to provide them with the tools to grasp them.

THE DENTAL HEALTH SIMULATION
Kindergarten aged children wear computerized Thinking Tags, that, through kinetic make-believe, show them the health
status of their "teeth". In the Dental Health Simulation, children are asked to wear the Tags for a short period of time while
they pretend to "feed" on various food items placed around the room. The food items have other Tags buried inside them,
which emit information via infrared signals as to the amount of sugar contained in a serving of that specific product. Sugar
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page        598

amounts vary from food to food, with sugared cereal being the highest and water having no sugar value at all. Furthermore,
a time-delay feature was added to simulate the temporal relationship between accumulation and decay. After a specific
time, calculated according to the amount of sugar accumulated (more sugar means less time), healthy teeth (indicated by
five green lights on the Tag turn red, indicating a state of dental decay. Children then have thirty seconds to get to the
brushing station before one of their teeth, or LED lights, turns red permanently, indicating the presence of a cavity.

RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Our Thinking Tag game has been designed to introduce children to the concept of accumulation. Students made comments
such as, "I'm eating the crackers" and "I have a cavity!", suggesting that they were able to personally identify with the
characteristics of their Tag. The first-person experiences demonstrated in the study shows the extent to which children are
drawn into the game, therefore enhancing the context for learning. Once the props were removed, children again referred to
the Tag as "it".
The children were also observed collaborating with one another, urging their peers to brush their teeth when the lights on
their Tag had turned red, suggesting that meaningful interaction is not impeded by the technology. It seems to be the case
that the nature and quality of student discourse is in fact enhanced through the use of the Thinking Tags. Some of the
children commented that "You brush before they go red!", indicating that they were able to identify proactive measures,
before any observable evidence of decay had taken place.
Early work with this simulation suggests that 5-year olds are able to grasp the concept of accumulation of sugar. When the
children were asked if they learned anything while they were doing this activity, they commented that they learned "not to
eat too much" of the sugary foods. However, several questions still need to be addressed, including: Are children building
on one concept after the other? What effect do the presence of classmates and the discourse have on learning? Furthermore,
the temporal element in the simulation seems to indicate an important learning advance in children this age and future
research may continue to explore the relationship between game time elapsed and amount of sugar.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to the Thinking Tag Committee at OISE/UT for their support.

REFERENCES
Canadian Dental Association Health Advisory (2000). Your Dental Health, Children's Teeth. Ottawa, Ontario. Courtesy
         CRHA (Calgary Regional Health Authority). [Web Resource] Available:
         http://www.cda-adc.ca/public/your_dental_health/childrens/cleaningenglish.html
Lave, J. (2000) The Principles of Situated Learning. http://tip.psychology.org/lave.html
Resnick, M., Berg,   B   & Eisenberg, M.  (2000).  Beyond Black  Boxes:  Bringing Transparency    and Aesthetics       Back to
         Scientific  Investigation.  Published  in  Journal  of  the  Learning  Sciences.    [Web  Resource]  Available:
         http://el.www.media.mit.edu/groups/el/Papers/mres/bbb-jls/
Resnick, M. (1998). Technologies for Lifelong Kindergarten. Educational Technology Research and Development,
         vol. 46, no. 4.
Resnick, M., Martin, F., Berg, R., Borovoy, R., Colella, V., Kramer, K., and Silverman, B. (1998). Digital Manipulatives.
         Proceedings of the CHI '98 conference, Los Angeles, April 1998.
