Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  599

        Presumptive Literacies in Technology-Integrated
                                         Science Curriculum
                                    Kimberley P. Williams, Louis M. Gomez
               Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools, Northwestern University
                      (k-williams1@northwestern.edu), (l-gomez@northwestern.edu )
ABSTRACT
In this paper we explore the multiple literacies presumed in the design of inquiry curriculum created at the Center for
Learning Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS). The current design of LeTUS inquiry-based, technology embedded
science curriculum presumes a facility with, and strategic use of literacies on the part of students who enact the curriculum.
Here literacy means two things: deriving meaning from patterns in knowledge domains like science and facility with
different information forms. We use teacher interviews and on-line discussions to expose presumptive literacies in design
and learners' literacy challenges and offer suggestions that teacher modifications to these units can inform future design to
support literacy in science.

Keywords: technology supported science curriculum, literacy, universal design

INTRODUCTION
Advanced learning technologies coupled with inquiry-based curricula can offer students access to powerful ideas in science
as never before. For example, tools like Geodyamic data base and World Watcher makes visualizations of Earth's structures
and data about its processes available to students and teachers in ways that fit into classroom activity. These tools, in
theory, will allow all students to engage in more authentic analysis of current problems like the impact of global warming
on the average temperature changes in our hemisphere or how to find earth's plate boundaries from earthquake and volcanic
activity data. Curriculum projects like those at the Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools (LeTUS) (Gomez &
Marx 1999; Krajick et. al. , 1998) and inquiry-focused projects(e.g. WISE) aim to create learning environments that make
this sort of ambitious science a regular part of children's science learning. This is a challenging endeavor with many
roadblocks. Nevertheless LeTUS and others are creating a substantial collection of technology-infused science units that are
finding growing  utility in  urban classrooms.   Heretofore our efforts at achieving  utility have centered on matters    like
technology access, scaffolds to learners' prior knowledge, and technology usability. These are, and will for some time,
remain important issues. We have devoted relatively less attention to the simple notion that learners must be literate to use
these units. In this paper we focus on the literacy demands for urban children embedded in modern inquiry-based curricula.
We now conjecture, and will later demonstrate, that, with respect to literacy, urban and second language learners lack the
necessary literacy skills to use many of the curricular materials and tools of current inquiry based, technology integrated
science curriculum.
To date a great deal of research has addressed how to create tools and materials to provide scaffolds (Edelson et. al., 1999;
Loh et.al., 1998 that provide access and support for connecting students' prior knowledge to the opportunities to learning in
curriculum, and deepen conceptual understandings in science domains. A central characteristic of these materials, whether
graphics, text, or media-based, is that they heavily engage students' literacy skills. We conjecture that the very scaffolds that
are designed to help students learn science may be inaccessible because they presume skills that students do not possess.

The Presumptive Literacies Study
The Presumptive Literacies Study was created to understand how to foreground the literacy demands of LeTUS curriculum
and how to design literacy supports within the curricula units. The project has three phases: (1) document the literacy
demands  of the  curricula;  (2)  engage in  university researcher-teacher researcher collaborative design  teams to   design
literacy-based modifications   to the units, (3) beta test the modifications in  LeTUS   classrooms,  and  develop a   set of
principles to support literacy and linguistic needs in LeTUS science curriculum.
Method
We engaged in a multi-methodological (interviews, on-line reports, classroom observation not reported here) approach to
data collection. For the purposes of organizing and analyzing the resultant data, we used a constant comparative research
approach. When we were satisfied that the final categories represented the literacy demands and teacher strategies themes
we began to conduct micro level analyses of each theme. The goal of the micro level analyses was to more fully describe
the themes and to develop a set of principles for supporting the literacy that is engaged in LeTUS science curriculum.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   600

FINDINGS
Results suggest that the LeTUS curriculum assumes that students require minimum support for, or have an adequate skill
set to draw from, to do at least the following seven literacy-based activities: (1) conduct internet research; (2) identify
research-relevant  information;   (3) recognize,  record,   and  organize  necessary information     from  science-related and
documentary video; (4) interpret dynamic databases, scientific visualization graphs and systems modeling tools; (5) add
research data to and organize information within advanced learning technology software; (6) access relevant background
knowledge (often text-based) and make connections to current content and process requirements of activities; (7) organize
and communicate research findings, especially utilizing multi-media tools. If curricular use requires these, and other,
literacy skills and students do not even recognize these as genres with specific structure, students' access to the powerful
ideas and tools of science made possible by inquiry-based techniques will be blocked. The data suggest that the literacy-
centered curriculum modifications reported here fall into 10 topical areas; 1) accessing and building on prior knowledge;
2) vocabulary development, 3) deepening concepts; 4) providing students with tools to organize their learning and "hang
their knowledge on, 5) building an awareness of patterns in information genres; 6) increasing reading comprehension; 7)
focusing inquiry 8) data interpretation using multiple sources; 9) communicating complex ideas using multiple genres; 10)
ongoing individual and collaborative assessment.

CONCLUSIONS
At the beginning of this report we claimed that little attention has been paid to the notion that learners must be
literate to use inquiry-based, technology  embedded   curricula.   We   have  attempted here  to call attention to the  literacy
demands for urban and second language learners in these curricula and have used teacher modifications of these curricula
as a lens into understanding how to deepen content and process understanding while supporting literacy skills. In sum, we
believe designers of inquiry curricular and supporting materials need to embark on two courses of action. First, designers
need to engage in reflective critique of materials themselves to make the literacy demands visible. Second, designers need
to pioneer a new set of techniques that will help in using science (and other curriculum as well) as sites to directly support
secondary literacy skills. We believe that teacher adaptation is one important lens to help us see literacy demands and to see
how to better support children in using literacy to learn.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported through a grant from the Joyce Foundation for the study of Literacy Design Challenges in
Progressive   Curriculum  and  National Science   Foundation    support to the  Center  for Learning  Technologies   in  Urban
Schools (LeTUS). Last but certainly not least, we thank the teachers for allowing us to gain insights into their practice and
theories about how to improve student learning in inquiry curriculum.

REFERENCES
Edelson, D. C., Brown, M., Gordin, D. N., & Griffin, D. A. (1999, February). Making visualization accessible to students.
GSA Today, 9(2), 8-10.
Gomez,    L., &  Marx, R.W.   (1999).  At the nexus  of    challenging curriculum  design,  learning technologies, and   school
transformation: The first year of the Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools. Symposium presented at the
annual meetings of the American Educational Research Association, Montreal, Canada.
Krajcik,  J., Blumenfeld, P.  C., Marx,   R.  W., Bass,    K. M., &  Fredricks, J. (1998).  Inquiry   in  project-based science
classrooms: Initial attempts by middle school students. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 313-350.
Loh, B., Reiser, B.J., Radinsky J., Edelson, D.C., Gomez, L.M. and Marshall, S. (1998). Developing reflective inquiry
practices: A case study of software, the teacher, and students. Published in Designing for Science: Implications from
Everyday, Classroom, and Professional Settings.
Moje, E.B., Collazo, T. and Carrillo, R. (2000, April). Maestro, What is Quality?: A Study of Scientific Literacy and
Reading   Achievement   Beyond    the Primary Grades."Paper     presented  at National  Association   for Research in   Science
Teaching. Orlando, FL.
