Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page   605

          Intentional Integration Supported by Collaborative
                                                Reflection
                             Miyake, N., Masukawa, H., Yuasa, K., Shirouzu, H.
                        School of Computer and Cognitive Sciences, Chukyo Univerisy
                nmiyake@sccs. masukawa@grad.sccs. yuasa@grad.sccs. shirouzu@sccs. {chukyo-u.ac.jp}

ABSTRACT
The skills for thematic, or intentional, integration of independent pieces of research, a highly difficult but important task in
academic training, is analyzed (Study 1) and supported by collaborative reflection (Studies 2 and 3). The results indicate
that simple scaffolds combined and embedded in a collaboratively reflective curriculum can support this highly complex
task.
KEYWORDS: Intentional integration, thematic integration, collaborative reflection
INTRODUCTION
In advanced collaborative classrooms, learners must not only study selected topics in groups but must also integrate such
contributed pieces of work to understand the overall theme. In study 1, we found advanced students actively decompose
each work into structural pieces and recompose them to form an entirely new structure. Study 2 tries to support such steps
with  simple  scaffolds like card arrangement, embedded  in thematically  well-formed    classroom activities. In   Study 3,
repetitive collaborative reflection was enforced on summary presentations of several independent research pieces, which
resulted in the juniors understanding the topic better. The overall results indicate that simple scaffolds combined and
embedded in a collaboratively reflective curriculum can support the highly complex task of intentional integration.

STUDY 1
PROCEDURE
Groups of cognitive science major students, ranging from sophomores and graduate students to a professional researcher,
were asked to integrate five independent introductory articles on human intelligence ("Exploring intelligence," Scientific
American Present 1998, Japanese edition). Fifteen cards were prepared to represent three structural elements of a research
paper, "research background," "main findings," and "implications." The 15 cards were used for integration in this study.
The sophomores read the articles in a jigsaw-puzzle fashion. The cards were expected to serve as scaffolds. Sophomore
groups and five other mixed groups of juniors, seniors, graduate students and a professional researcher arranged these cards
onto an A3-size sheet of paper, to support writing the summary by collaboratively reflecting upon them.
RESULTS
The task took 30 to 60 minutes depending on the experience of the subjects. Three typical layouts from the three group
categories are shown in Fig. 1. Card number 1 means that the card is taken from article No. 1 and so on. Figure 1 a) was
prepared by sophomores, who mostly preserve the independence of each article. Figure 1. b) was prepared by juniors to
seniors lead by an advanced doctoral student, with a chunk consisting of three "research background" cards from three
different articles. Figure 1 c) is a product of a professional researcher, which shows a complete reconstruction of the
structural elements of the original articles, in clear contrast to a) and b). The professional researcher actively decomposed
the pieces so that she could entirely reconstruct a new integrated view of them.

   12    4                              325                                       2
      2                                                                           3-  4
   1    24                               3                                                   ·
   1                                                 2                                                  ·  15
   33    5                                       234                              2
   3    5  4                             1                                        4
      5                                 5                                                    ·   3
a)                             b)                                c)
Figure 1: Card arrangements of integrating independent articles.
This card arrangement environment is now computer implemented and usable for further explorations.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page    606

STUDY 2: PROCEDURAL SUPPORT FOR INTENTIONAL INTEGRATION
PROCEDURES
In order to see whether specific scaffolds are possible for professional-like integration, sophomores in cognitive science
classes were  asked   to  extract important  pieces  from  original articles  and record  them   onto small cards,    and then  to
thematically integrate them by arranging the cards two-dimensionally. The visibility and the tangibility of the cards and
their arrangement are expected to raise the chances of collaborative reflection, which then would raise the quality of the
summaries. The task was to integrate three independent pieces of work, "sensory deprivation," "intrinsic motivation and
spontaneous learning," and "the negative effect of rewards on intrinsically motivated behavior." The extraction of the cards
was further guided by the same set of questions focused on structural elements used for all the articles. For the experimental
group, the cards were colored differently according to the questions, so that the same color would guide the gathering and
comparison of the answers to the same questions to facilitate the reconstruction. Seventy-six sophomores participated in
this study. Forty formed 12 groups, to whom colored cards were given. The other 36 students were divided into 12 groups
to whom only white cards were given. At the end of the task, they summarized their integrations individually. The entire
process was technologically supported with note-sharing and presentation systems.
RESULTS AND IMPLICATIONS
More than half the subjects who used the colored cards could give detailed summaries, while less than 10% in the control
group (white cards) did the same. At the end of the individual reading session, the ratio of the sophomores who extracted
the main points with sufficient detail was found to be 54% in the experimental group compared to 21% in the control group.
This conspicuous difference between the conditions suggests that the color-coded cards helped the experimental group
students to yield richer resources for later collaborative reflection.
STUDY 3: REPETITIVE COLLABORATIVE REFLECTION FOR THEMATIC INTEGRATION
Study 1 clearly showed that intentional integration skill was acquired through long-term experience, for which classrooms
rarely  provide  enough   chances. Study   3  investigated the effects  of repetitive  exposure  of  integration in  collaborative
reflection in an attempt to supplement such professional experience. Twenty-eight junior students in our cognitive science
course were required to create repetitive presentations to the class on seven studies of Wason's selection task: the original
Wason   experiment,    the  thematic bias  studies, the pragmatic   reasoning    schema  studies  of  Cheng and     Holyoak,   and
Cosmides' social contract theory. They worked in seven groups.
A typical thematic integration would include explanations of the classic, laboratory-based human reasoning skills research,
and more situated, or everyday cognition studies. It would also include how Cheng and Holyoak reconsolidated them from
a cognitive psychological stand point with their new construct of "pragmatic schemas." A typical "lecture" on this topic
would run in this fashion but is not easily absorbed by the students. In one of the first author's surveys, at the end of the
semester course, only two out of 86 students could explain how the pragmatic scheme worked, the core construct of the
Cheng and Holyoak paper.
PROCEDURE
The task given to these 28 students in this class was to construct a 15-minute talk to sophomores on this topic. During the
six-week course with two 90-minute classes per week, the students were asked to give three short, preparatory talks and one
final, full-scale talk to the class, with ample time for class discussion as a chance for collaborative reflection.
RESULTS AND IMPLICATIONS
At Week 4, only one out of seven groups could start structural integration of the pieces. At the time of their presentation in
the fifth week, five groups gave highly structured presentations, integrated in the sense that they decomposed parts of each
research to restructure the entire set of seven studies. Their presentations were marked with descriptions like dichotomizing
experimental approaches of logical reasoning studies against more situated views. This indicates that the students in their
junior  years have    the basic capability to integrate research   pieces  by decomposing,    identifying and    restructuring the
constructs of the research. However, careful analyses of the content reveal that the presentation quality is distinctively
different from   that which  a  normal professional   researcher   would  produce  (in  particular, they tended  to  lack precise
descriptions  of pragmatic   schemas,  how    it works  and/or its development),   showing   that they can  make     use of better
supports, if available.

GENERAL DISCUSSION: TOWARD THE INTEGRATED SUPPORT ENVIRONMENT
The acquisition of appropriate skills for proper intentional integration requires more than a single technological support in
one course    College courses,  particularly  the ones  in an  interdisciplinary field like cognitive  science,  should  be more
integrated with each other, and should be conducted in a technologically rich environment. In such a learning environment,
students from their first year to graduation can gradually participate in and take advantage of the collaborative reflection so
that they can incorporate it into their meta-cognitive repertoire.
