Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 607

            Components of an Optimal Online Environment
                                                 Christine Alexander
                                            United States International University
                                                    calexan3@san.rr.com
ABSTRACT
Experts were polled in the area of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) research to determine components
of an optimal constructivist/collaborative online learning environment. One hundred seventy-seven panelists were asked to
participate. Eighteen panelists responded contributing 93 components. They were then asked to rate these components on a
scale of 0-7. Thirteen panelists responded. The components were then ranked according to average score. The top ten
ranking components were calculated. The "Most Popular" components rated "5" or better, were determined by majority. A
third round seeking a consensus was attempted.

Keywords
Constructivist, collaborative, online, Delphi Poll, top-ten components, "most popular" components

PURPOSE
The  purpose   of this study   was  to determine components      of an optimal   constructivist/collaborative online learning
environment.

RESEARCH DESIGN
In  this  study,  a  Delphi    Poll  was  utilized.  Expert    opinion  is  used   to  determine   components    of   optimal
constructivist/collaborative learning environment since a thoroughly explored model has yet to appear in the literature. The
individual responses remained anonymous; however, a list of the panelists' names and their institutions appeared on the
questionnaires.

PANELIST DETERMINATION
The panel members are experts in the field of CSCL research. All of the panel members have been conference presenters at
the CSCL Conference held at Stanford University in December of 1999. The range of expertise includes international
researchers in the fields of computer science, instructional design, organizational systems design, communications, and
educational technology. The researchers hailed from universities, government research laboratories, and private industry.

PROCEDURE
The procedures used in this study were successive rounds of a questionnaire. The first round asked participants to provide
their own five components of an optimal constructivist/collaborative online learning environment. Round two asked the
panelists to rate all of the 93 components resulting from round one on a scale of 0-7. Round three attempted a consensus of
the "most Popular" components. The rounds were sent and received via e-mail.

FINDINGS
Two types of results were generated from the data. First, each statement rating was averaged. These ratings were then
ranked   in order from  highest  to lowest. The  highest average    rating received a  score of 6. Second,    "Most  Popular"
components rated "5" or better, were determined by majority.

The top ten ranking components were:
        #1: Peer interaction.
        #2: Sharing the results of your efforts with others.
        #3: Collaborative knowledge construction.
        #4: A way of negotiating group consensus or conclusions.
        Equally ranked #5: A means of motivating, focusing and scaffolding the discussion; a shared workspace.
        Equally ranked #6: robust technology (easy access, ease of use, etc.); and continuity over time and space, such as
         provided by threaded discussions.
        Equally ranked #7: Somebody facilitates interaction, this requires the possibility to monitor what is going on
         during interaction; and some facility for students to communicate (synchronously or asynchronously).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  608

      #8: Associated curriculum framework. The accompanying curriculum should provide a framework that promotes
       collaboration, construction, reflection, peer review, etc.
      Equally ranked    #9:  Presence   of the  collaborators,   either  through    digital/electronic means   or  colocation;
       accountability for one's  collaborative  actions,  that is others are aware    of authorship, without    explicit signing
       required; an active role of mentor; support, encouragement, and challenge from the other people (co-learners &
       mentors) involved, being taken seriously by others, and being given room to play; construction: students are given
       tools that let them fairly easily generate their own representations (drawing, animations, text, etc); clear temporal
       organization: synchronous and asynchronous participation can both be supported.
      Equally ranked    #10: Scaffolding   to help students    with the  tasks they   are involved     in as well as with  the
       collaboration itself; collaborative technology that helps participants communicate as well as share intermediate
       technical results; sharing: student can view other students (public) work; persistence of the discussion to support
       group and individual reflection over time.

"Most Popular " Components rated "5" or better by a majority of the panelists were:
      Presence of the collaborators, either through digital/electronic means or colocation.
      An active role of mentor.
      Associated curriculum framework.
      Peer interaction.
      Clarity of how to participate.
      Sharing the results of your efforts with others.
      Careful representation of users to each other.
      Optimal awareness functionality.
      Communication and peer review.
      People engaged in personally meaningful projects.
      Somebody facilitates interaction.
      Patterns or templates for knowledge representation or structuring, based on didactical valid principles, that can be
       used as a staring point for constructive activities and critical reflection.
      Teacher designers.
      Face to face sessions included in overall scheme.
The "most popular" list is more significant than the "top ten" list. The "most popular" list was determined by a consistency
of high scores rather than averaged high scores. The consistent high score is more significant in a poll with a small number
of respondents. The consistent high scores removes some skewing of results that takes place due to the extreme scoring of a
few respondents. The "most popular" list should be used as the essential components in future models of an optimal
constructivist/collaborative online learning environment.

SIGNIFICANCE
A working model of an optimal constructivist/collaborative online learning environment is needed in the field distance
education. The results of this study provide needed guidelines for designing optimal collaborative learning environments.
These findings generated a definitive list of essential components for constructivist/collaborative online environments as
determined by a majority consensus of experts in computer supported collaborative learning research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank all of the panelists participating is this study. I also thank my dissertation committee members, Maria Fernandez,
Holly Wilson, and George Stamos, at United States International University.
