Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   609

      Webtanks for Knowledge Management: Web-based
                      Collaborative Learning Environment
                                                        Zann Gill
                                         Director of Program Development
                  BEACON (Bio-Evolutionary Advanced Concepts for NASA), a think tank
                                        RIACS, NASA Ames Research Center
                                   650-604-4370 sgill@mail.arc.nasa.gov
ABSTRACT
My  assignment    at NASA   Ames   Research    Center   is to develop     a program  plan for   a  think tank,  BEACON      (Bio-
Evolutionary Advanced Concepts for NASA), that brings together cross-disciplinary teams to conceive the next generation
of NASA technology and scientific research across IT and Fundamental Biology. A "webtank" (think tank on the web) is
being developed to support think tank activities. Prior to implementing a webtank for BEACON, I initiated collaboration
with the SETI Institute on their development of a high school integrated science curriculum (astronomy, geology, biology,
and the evolution of technology) where students explore how the concept of evolution underpins and integrates these
disciplines. Curriculum requirements for the final Evolution of Technology module provided an opportunity to develop,
pilot, and test a self-organizing collaborative web environment, or webtank, to be later adapted, augmented, and extended to
support BEACON. SETI established a systematic method for pilot testing and field testing all elements of the curriculum,
and so offered a useful webtank testbed.

KEYWORDS
Computer-supported, web-enabled, intranet, collaborative learning

INTRODUCTION
Webtanks   (think tanks  on the web)    can be designed    to serve    as guides, frameworks    to  facilitate collaboration, and
knowledge   management    repositories, supporting   students,  designers,   and  inventors  in team    innovation. High   school
students in Voyages    Through  Time,   SETI's new,   integrated   science   and  technology curriculum   will   form  teams  and
collaborate to conceive new inventions. The webtank supports their invention process as a
   series of prompts to help student designer/ inventor teams generate innovative, integrated design concepts for their
   new inventions;
   way to facilitate collaboration, enabling students to interact with other students around issues that arise as they design
   and integrate those projects into a larger, collaborative plan;
   framework to structure archives and resources in order to reTRACE creative processes that have occurred in this
   environment.

COLLABORATIVE KNOWLEDGE-MAKING AND MANAGEMENT
I define information as "interpreted data," while knowledge is "information in action." Knowledge management is often
equated  with  databases and information    storage. If instead,   knowledge   management    is integrated  into  a collaborative
knowledge-making process, users post their knowledge resources to share. Critical to successful knowledge management is
having a framework that facilitates and supports collaborative knowledge-making, so the webtank is designed to serve two
complementary functions:
   A repository, offering a knowledge management framework for information resources and project archives (passive
   mode), and
   A think tank "prompt", providing process support for invention and collaborative problem-solving and capability to
   record sessions (active mode).
Users click back and forth between passive and active modes. Collaborators use document libraries (passive mode) to
prepare for collaborative problem-solving sessions (active mode). The meetings themselves, and the ways the meetings use
these resources,  can be captured (active   mode),   permitting  later analysis  of what  worked   and   what  didn't, as well as
refinement  of the   knowledge  management    system    based  on  its continual  assessment    in use.  So a  Continual  Survey
Questionnaire capability supports ongoing development. It can gather qualitative metrics from the perspectives of learners,
team leaders or teachers, and website developers (concerned with knowledge management, scalability, and maintenance).
Yale University Professor Irving Janis studied why committees fail by analyzing a number of case studies from public
policy. If Janis was correct in stressing the importance of each individual's perspective for group process, then a webtank to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                      page  610

support self-directed learning and innovation will require mechanisms to retain individual identity within the larger group
process. Drawing an analogy between collaborative problem-solving and evolution supports this position; having a lot of
cells doesn't make an organism complex; it's still just a lot of cells. Differentiation is a prerequisite for complexity in cells
as in collaborative group learning.
In the active mode a Webtank Integration Broker supports collaborative transactions, so potential collaborators can bring
their project ideas and find others with whom they can collaborate on a "bigger picture" that combines multiple projects.
Complementing the active mode, at the end of a problem-solving session the webtank, again in passive mode, evaluates
individual web entries and archives process records with multiple mechanisms for search and matching, requiring metadata
and search capabilities. Some of the process record-keeping and archiving can be automated and could benefit by adapting
AI tools for knowledge acquisition, indexing and retrieval. Additional technical challenges include design of a scalable
environment that will self-organize as it scales up, establishing centralized human manual control and coordination that can
gradually be replaced by decentralized autonomous agent control.

Conclusion
Webtanks can serve as petri dishes to culture the creative process, so that "invisible observers" can study how performance
in this environment. Though any theory about the creative process is hard to prove, my premise is that a partial correlation
can be drawn between individual creative process (unobservable) and group design and concept formation, where the
invention process is open to view. NASA, with its vast network of collaborating universities, has need for better knowledge
management systems so that a range of institutions working on aspects of the same problem from different disciplinary
perspectives can more effectively collaborate. A problem-focused webtank necessarily crosses institutional boundaries,
starting small to develop to test knowledge management strategies in its own document collection, data and project archives
and to develop a system that can later be extended. Webtanks can pioneer a new type of intranet, one that is project or
program-based, rather than institution-based, providing a foundation for emergent intelligence in distributed smart systems
of the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like   to acknowledge the    collaboration with The SETI   Institute, in particular Jane Fisher, Project Director
Curriculum Development for Voyages Through Time.

REFERENCES
Gill, Zann. Webtank Assessment: Performance in Web-based Collaborative Learning Environments. Human Systems 2001:
        Exploring the Human Frontier. Houston, Texas, June 20-22, 2001.
Gill, Zann. Webtank Design: intranet support for collaborative problem-solving. HCI International 2001. New Orleans, 5-
        10 August, 2001 also published in Systems, Social, and Internationalization: Design Aspects of Human Computer
        Interaction vol 2. edited by Michael Smith and Gavriel Salvendy. N.J.: Lawrence Earlbaum Assoc. 2001. P. 292-6.
Gill, Zann. Webtanks: Tools for Learning by Design. Siggraph 2001. Los Angeles, 12-17 August 2001.
http://www.arl.org/newsltr/213/assess.html and http://www.wcer.wisc.edu/nise/cl1/flag/goals/goals.htm
Janis, Irving. Groupthink: A Psychological Study of Policy Decisions and Fiascoes. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1984.
Smith, Reid and Farquhar, Adam. "The Road Ahead for Knowledge Management" in AI Magazine, American Association
        for Artificial Intelligence, 2000.
