Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   611

             C. QUALITATIVE ANALYSES OF CASE STUDIES AND THEIR
                  IMPLICATIONS FOR CSCL

             Supporting Chinese Distance Learners through
          Computer-Mediated Communication ­ Revisiting
                                               Salmon's Model
                                          Peter J Smith, Swee Noi Smith
                                                 Deakin University
                                    pjbs@deakin.edu.au, ssmith@deakin.edu.au
ABSTRACT
Salmon's   (2000) proposed   model   for the   effective development  of on-line  communication   and   collaboration between
student suggests  that   on-line socialisation forms an   early and important   component  of establishing required   levels of
comfort and skill. In this paper we review research with Chinese learners that suggests that some adjustments to Salmon's
model may be advisable for these students. Specifically, the model is redeveloped to provide a more structured experience,
and to use that structure to develop on-line skills, such that the development of comfortable socialisation is seen as an on-
going process rather than only an early enabler.

Keywords
Computer-mediated communication, Chinese learners, on-line socialisation, on-line structure

PREVIOUS RESEARCH FINDINGS
Over the last few years interest has increased in research focussing on the provision of distance education programs to
identifiable clienteles. Jegede  (1999)  observed  that  knowledge  of clientele  is becoming a   major issue facing  distance
education, while Calder (2000) has echoed this view and pointed to its importance in terms of service to students.
Apart from the issues of course design and content sensitivity towards different cultural groups, there is evidence of
different forms of learning approaches, and learning strategies. Smith, Miller and Crassini (1998) showed, in their study of
the approaches to learning by Chinese university students, as measured by Entwistle and Ramsden's (1983) Approaches to
Studying, that Chinese students are not surface/rote learners, and that anxiousness over a fear of failure among Chinese
students is associated with surface learning behaviours. An Efficiency Orientation identified in their research indicates that
Chinese students are strategic in their selection of what to study, motivated by success in academic results. Later work with
Chinese students by Smith and Smith (1999) noted a need for support in the effective organisation of study, and the
development of conceptual frameworks.
Baron (1998) described the provision for CMC study group formation to reflect the collaborative learning behaviour that
may be expected in a collectivist Confucian Heritage culture. Findings were that these study groups were not widely used,
with the students preferring the lecture format provided through the on-line subjects. While the announcements area was
well used, along with the on-line subjects and the resources, the chat facilities were not frequently visited, although Baron
detected a growing usage. There is a clear connection here between Baron's findings and those of Smith, Miller and
Crassini (1998) and Smith and Smith (1999). Chat rooms by their nature are largely unstructured, and do not clearly lead to
enhanced assessment outcomes. Accordingly, they are probably not seen as other than fairly superfluous activity to Chinese
learners.

REDEVELOPING SALMON'S MODEL FOR CHINESE LEARNERS
Salmon    (2000) has proposed     a five-stage  model    whereby  participants gradually increase their involvement    in, and
commitment to, CMC as they become more comfortable and proficient with the environment. As the stages progress, so
does the sophistication of the interaction and the learning outcomes. These five stages are:
·   Access and motivation
·   On-line socialisation
·   Information exchange
·   Knowledge construction
  Online socialisation
                                                                                                               Development
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                 page  612

·                      Development towards more self--direction in the CMC environment

The difficulty with the model as it stands, for Chinese learners at least, is the positioning of on-line socialisation as an early
stage of the process, and the leveraging off that socialisation for development into the later stages of the model. It is
proposed here that on-line socialisation cannot be relied upon with Chinese learners to provide the platform of comfortable
communication and that, rather than being established as an early stage in the process, this form of socialisation needs to be
developed as an ongoing process within a structure and a purpose that is connected to the program of study. On-line
socialisation,                it is argued, needs to be developed    through other parts of   the process, and comfort          with  that form of
communication viewed as an on-going development throughout the process, rather than just an early and enabling stage.
Our suggested modification to the Salmon model is shown in Figure 1 below, with more detailed explanation provided in
the longer CSCL2002 paper.

                            Stage                            Process

                                     1               Access and Motivation

                                     2                Information Exchange

                                     3               Knowledge construction

                                                      Ongoing development
                                      4
                                                        and socialisation

                                                                     Figure 1: Representation of  proposed  on-line          activity sequence  for
                                                                     Chinese students (adapted from Salmon, 2000).

CONCLUSION
Our redevelopment of Salmon's (2000) model, it has been argued, provides for a set of on-line learning development
strategies that are better suited to the characteristics of Chinese learners identified through the literature. Additionally, we
would argue that there is evidence for the applicability of our revision of Salmon's model to much broader groups of
distance learners than only Chinese, but we have further work to undertake before being confident of this wider application.

REFERENCES
Calder, J. (2000) Beauty lies in the eye of the beholder. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning,
                          1, 1, www.icaap.org/iuicode?149.1.1.10.
Entwistle, N. & Ramsden, P. (1983) Understanding Student Learning. Nichols Publishing Company, New York.
Jegede, O. (1999) `Priorities in open and distance education research; opinions of experts and practitioners within the
                          Commonwealth', paper presented to the Pan-Commonwealth Forum on Open Learning, Brunei, March.
Salmon, G. (2000) E-moderating: The Key to Teaching and Learning On-line, London, Kogan Page.
Smith, P.J. & Smith, S.N. (1999) Differences between Chinese and Australian students: some implications for distance
                          educators. Distance Education, 20, 64-80.
Smith, S.N., Miller, R.J. & Crassini, B. (1998) Approaches to studying of Australian and Overseas Chinese students.
                          Higher Education Research and Development, 17, 261-275.
