Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 613

 Design Experiments for Integrating a CSCL Technology
             into Japanese Elementary Science Education
 Jun Oshima#, Ritsuko Oshima#, Isao Murayama#, Shigenori Inagaki*, Hayashi Nakayama+,
                                  Etsuji Yamaguchi+, Makiko Takenaka*
                   #Shizuoka Univ., Japan, *Kobe Univ., Japan, +Miyazaki Univ., Japan
                                      joshima@oshima-7.ed.shizuoka.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
We designed CSCL-based science lessons for 4th and 6th grade. The CSCL technology we used was Knowledge Forum
(KF), the second generation of CSILE software. In the first year, we designed the lesson in which KF was used as an extra
communication tool. Goal-sensitive assessments for the lesson showed that students did not frequently discuss on the lesson
concepts in a cognitive manner. The lesson design in the second year was revised by providing students with cognitive
scaffolds so that they could more articulately discuss their thoughts as objects. Comparative analyses manifested that
students in the second year were more engaged in science activities through social construction of their knowledge on KF.
Design principles we found to be effective are discussed.
Keywords
CSILE, Knowledge Forum, design experiments, Japanese elementary science education

INTRODUCTION
"Computer-Supported Intentional Learning Environments (CSILE)" proposed by Scardamalia, Bereiter and their colleagues
is an educational philosophy for the design of computer-supported learning environments (Scardamalia, & Bereiter, 1996).
CSILE software is a communal database system in which learners are allowed to externalize their thoughts mainly in the
form of texts  or/and graphics called "notes," then engage   in collaboratively organizing their knowledge as        objects to
advance their communal understanding as a whole. This communal database structure has been found to provide learners
with opportunities to be involved in knowledge advancement through distribution of their expertise, and to eventually
facilitate learners' conceptual understanding of complex scientific phenomena in comparison with traditional instructions.
(Oshima, Scardamalia, & Bereiter, 1995).

DESIGN EXPERIMENTS AS EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
The design experiments is not just compiling all we have known on learning, but an attempt to blend expertise from
different areas. In our design experiments, we referred to the basic system of the community of learners by Brown and
Campione (1996). In the community of learners, the basic components are research (student-directed learning), information
sharing, consequential task (i.e., students' recognition of their knowledge as applied to problem solving in the future), deep
disciplinary content (beyond textbook levels), and students' reflection on their own activities (i.e., metacognition). In the
framework, our challenge for the curriculum design was to effectively use KF to facilitate students' sharing information and
reflection.

ACTIVITY STRUCTURE IN JAPANESE ELEMENTARY SCIENCE EDUCATION
In Japanese elementary schools, teachers have a widely shared framework of science activities for students to do in the
classroom which we think is similar to the community of learners. The activities are supported by Japanese school cultures
(Linn, Lewis, Tsuchida, & Songer, 2000). Students are regularly educated to listen to others and collaborate with one
another in small groups. They are also required of reflecting on their own activities in the classroom with their classroom
goals determined by themselves at the beginning of the year. Thus, students' dispositions to learning help them to engage in
the organized science activity. Science activity at Japanese elementary schools is well-structured based on instructional
goals to make students think of science through their investigations as involvement in authentic science activities.

DESIGN EXPERIMENTS ACROSS TWO YEARS
LESSON PLAN 1: "NATURE AROUND US" FOR GRADE 4
We planned the lesson for sixteen periods (a period was 45 minute long). The lesson started with the teacher's attempt to
connect his students' interests to learning goals in the lesson. After the training session for KF, students in small groups
conducted their investigations on how plants and insects changed in the winter out of the regular schedule. The lesson was
proceeded   with several cross talks  in the classroom.   Students   were encouraged to report what  they found       in  their
investigations on KF and then comment on one another. Further, in the final stage of the lesson, students were asked by the
teacher to discuss "how plants and insects look like in the winter."
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page     614

LESSON PLAN 2: "AIR AND HOW THINGS BURN" FOR GRADE 6
Students were expected to understand that oxygen is needed for things to burn in the air, then why and how things stop
burning in relation to the existence of oxygen  in the air. Based  on  our lessons from  the first year, we invented     the
followings as scaffolds: (1) The   lesson plan was  designed   so that students were    more concerned   with conceptual
understandings by structuring students' activities as theory building through construction of their explanatory models. (2)
Students were instructed to report, on Knowledge Forum, their thoughts in a specific form of scientific thinking such as
hypotheses, experimental designs, predictions, results, and their discussion. (3) The participatory structure of students'
science activities was more articulately designed. (4) Researchers and graduate students regularly discussed with students
on their modeling, hypotheses, experimental designs, or their interpretations on results. (5) We changed the interface so that
students could more easily recognize and use the database as a tool for their reflection. One feature was a graphical view to
show them their understanding in progress. Secondary, we created a new sub-window called "diary."

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
One of remarkable differences between the two years was that the second year students reported their thoughts in more
cognitive or socially cognitive manner. The teacher did not consider that the difference was from the difference in ages.
Rather, he thought that it was more difficult to have students at the older age engage in social knowledge construction. In
Japanese schools, we usually see older students (particularly, at junior high schools) not report any ideas in the classroom
or be afraid of expressing themselves. In the second year, we designed students' activities at individual, small group, and
whole class level. KF was used mainly for reflecting on their and others' work at the small group level. The teacher and
students also used notes in KF for presenting their thoughts in front of the class. Thus, they had articulate objects to talk
about for improving their understanding in the collaborative manner. Our video research in progress has manifested that
teacher and students talked in more cognitive or socially cognitive manner in face-to-face discussion as well as on KF.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This study was financially supported by the research grant of the Ministry of Education and Science, Japan (Grant #:
11480030). We would like to thank students and teachers who welcomed us as action researchers and collaborators for their
curriculum design. We also thank Hiromi Nagai, Hidefumi Nomura and Yoshihito Endo for their help in coding data.

REFERENCES
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments: On
        procedures,  principles, and  systems. In  L.  Shauble  &   R.  Glaser  (Eds.), Innovations   in  Learning:     New
        Environments for Education (pp. 289-325). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Linn, M. C., Lewis, C., Tsuchida, I., & Songer, N. B. (2000). Beyond fourth-grade science: Why do US and Japanese
        students diverge? Educational Researcher, 29(3), 4-14.
Oshima, J., C. Bereiter, & Scardamalia, M. (1995). Information-access characteristics for high conceptual progress in a
        computer-networked learning environment. Computer Support for Collaborative Learning '95, Bloomington, IN,
        USA. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Scardamalia, M. and C. Bereiter (1996). "Student communities for the advancement of knowledge." Communications of the
        ACM 39(4): 36-37.
