Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  615

       Examining Synchronous Tutoring in a Virtual World
                                               Maria Beatrice Ligorio
                 University of Salerno (IT) ­ Visiting Scholar University of Nijmegen (NL)
                                                bealigorio@hotmail.com
                                                Alessandra Talamo
                                               University of Rome (IT)
                                            Alessandra.talamo@uniroma1.it
                                                Robert-Jan Simons
                                               Utrecht University (NL)
                                                   r.simons@ivlos.uu.nl
Keywords: Virtual community, on-line tutorship, new learning, constructivism, discourse analysis

TEORETHICAL FRAMEWORK
The role of the tutor within a virtual community assumes specific features. First of all, because the concept of community
fosters certain processes, and second of all technical features of the virtual environments in which the community lives are
taken in account. The community assumes as its central focus group organization and sharing common goals (Brown and
Campione,    1990; Lave   and Wenger,  1991).  The     context-situated learning  is relevant   and connected to the   idea of
"distributed" knowledge (Salomon, 1993). According to this perspective, the tutor should push participants towards a more
central participation, should fosters the social interaction, and should support the "emigration" of the knowledge from one
source and its "appropriation" by the others. This paper explores the tutors' on-line role in a learning environment called
Euroland.

THE EUROLAND PROJECT
Euroland is a virtual community composed by students, teachers and researchers from the two countries (Italy and The
Netherlands). The community designed, built and populated a three-dimensional (3D) world. The content of the world
included several "cultural" Houses, such as Houses of Food, Music, Art, and Travel.
The virtual world was constructed using the Active Worlds (AW) software (http://www.activeworlds.com) and through an
action-research methodology (Ligorio, 2001). The software used differs from a Multi-user Objects Oriented environment
(MOO) because virtual objects can contain other virtual objects and they can be visualized from the inside.
The community of Euroland was composed of seven groups of students (4 Italian and 3 Dutch), their teachers, some
occasional visitors, a cross-national research group and three on-line tutors with different competencies. The students
ranged   in age from  9 to 14  years. The community       connected to   Euroland    during the  1999-2000  school  year. The
interdependence principle (Salomon, 1993) was applied by asking the students from one country to build the cultural
Houses for the other country.

DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
The on-line chats are the main source of data. The three tutors participated with the 57% of the total utterances in chat. Two
different analysis systems are combined and qualitative analysis is provided.
The first analysis is carried out with a category system dedicated to the analysis of tutor interventions' (utterances) and
describes how the Euroland on-line tutors exploit their actions within the virtual community. Three independent researchers
checked the interventions' categorization. The uncertain cases were discussed until an agreement had been reached.
The category   system  of tutorship comprises  the following  four  different functions   (Ashton,  Roberts and  Teles, 1999;
Talamo, Zucchermaglio & Ligorio, 2001): Managerial, Social, Technical, and Pedagogical.
Results show that the most relevant function is the managerial (20% of the total tutors' interventions). This function seems
to match with the potentialities of the chats (Talamo & Ligorio, 2002). The other functions are carried out through the
other communication tools embedded in the virtual environment (a mailing list available for the project, a discussion
forum), in certain cases off-line and often face-to-face, within the classrooms.
The second type of analysis is done through the discourse analysis and it is aimed at showing the interactive dimension of
tutoring a  chat-based  community.   Discourse analysis   provides  significant  data  on   the social construction of  shared
meanings in the community. Talk is considered as social action (Antaki, 1994) and contributes to identifying the functions
put into action through talk by the community members. The development of tutorship is, in the case of Euroland, mostly
negotiated in "talk in interaction" (Schegloff, 1992).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page   616

The chats were selected on the basis of relevant events in which the tutorship functions are more evident: a) Newcomers'
arrival; b) Members talking explicitly about tutors' actions; c) Other members acting as tutors.
The chat analysis showed that tutorship is also the result of a negotiation process between tutors and students. During the
presentation, chats' excerpts will be presented proving that: a) tutorship is a fluid, situated and dynamic process; b) tutors
share their functions with the other members of the community.

CONCLUSIONS
In this project, the tutorship on-line was  aimed at establishing a virtual community of learners.    Tutoring on-line is a
complex action, performed through four different functions: managerial, social, pedagogical and technical. The function
performed most on-line is the managerial.
The discourse analysis shows that, in specific situations, the other members of the community cover some aspects of the
tutorship. This result shows that a virtual community of learners has been established and, at the same time, new features of
on-line tutorship are highlighted.

REFERENCES
André, E., Rist, T., & Müller, J. (1997). WebPersona: A Life-Like Presentation Agent for Educational Applications on the
         World-Wide Web. Proceedings of the workshop Intelligent Educational Systems on the World Wide Web, 8th
         World Conference of the AIED Society, Kobe, Japan, August 18-22.
Antaki,C. (1994). Explaining and Arguing. The social organization of accounts. London: Sage.
Ashton, S, Roberts, T., & Teles, L. (1999). Investigating the Role of the Instructor in Collaborative On-line Environments.
         Poster presented at the Conference Computer Supported Collaborative Learning `99, Stanford, December 12-15.
Brown,  A.L. &   Campione,  J.C.   (1990). Communities  of learning or a context by any  other     name. In D. Kuhn  (Ed.)
         Contributions to human development, 21, 108-126.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.
Ligorio, M.B. (2001). Integrating communication formats: synchronous versus asynchronous and text-based versus visual.
         Computers and Education. Vol. 37, 103-125.
Salomon, G. (1993). No distribution without individual's cognition: a dynamic interaction view. In G. Salomon (Ed.)
         Distributed cognitions. Psychological and educational consideration. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
         111-138.
Talamo, A., & Ligorio, M.B. (2001). Strategic identity in the cyberspace. In G. Riva & C. Galimberti (Eds), special issue of
         Journal of CyberPsychology and Behavior, The mind and the Web: Psychology in the Internet age, 4, 109-122.
Talamo, A. Zucchermaglio, C., & Ligorio, M.B. (2001). Communities' Development in CVEs and sustaining functions of
         on-line tutorship. In G. Riva & C. Galimberti (Eds), CYBERPSYCHOLOGY: Mind, cognition and society in the
         Internet Age. IOS Amsterdam. 186-208 http://www.emergingcommunication.com/
