Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page     617

Minority Students' Participation in a Knowledge Building
                   Community: A Sociocultural Perspective
                                           Anita Slater, Jan van Aalst
                               Faculty of Education, Simon Fraser University
                                             Burnaby, B.C., V5A 1S6
                                                          slater@sfu.ca

ABSTRACT
Minority students' participation in on-line discourse is discussed with reference to sociocultural perspectives on discourse
and  learning, which suggest that cultural and   linguistic  minority   students' opportunities for full   participation may be
diminished, negatively impacting their learning.
Keywords: Discourse, appropriation, community of practice

INTRODUCTION
Part of an ongoing study aimed at facilitating and examining the use of Knowledge Forum (a online database program
which allows students to engage in communal knowledge building), the present study was conducted in an 11th grade class
in a suburban British Columbia high school, where Knowledge Forum was used for a six week period during a unit on
nuclear physics. Scardamalia, Bereiter and  Lamon    (1994)   suggested   that the  differences in  the participation levels  of
different types of students (e.g. high and low achievers, males and females) were all but eliminated when an earlier version
of Knowledge Forum (Computer-Supported Intentional Learning Environments, or CSILE) was used. We wanted to find
out if the participation levels and learning of the minority students in this class was enhanced by the use of Knowledge
Forum. At the conclusion of the unit, we conducted semistructured interviews (in addition to other means of data collection
such as classroom observation and analysis of the online discourse) with three minority students during which we asked
them to discuss their experiences in their physics class.

SOCIOCULTURAL PERSPECTIVES ON LANGUAGE AND LEARNING
This project   was informed by sociocultural perspectives     on language   and   learning according    to which language    (or
discourse) is not a neutral code but rather a set of symbolic resources which are appropriated by differently positioned
people to accomplish particular purposes, and which dialogically creates and renews our social world(s). In this view, the
acquisition or appropriation of language is not unproblematic. Bakhtin (cited in Gee, 1996) wrote: "The word in language is
half someone else's. It becomes "one's own" only when the speaker populates it with his own intention, his own accent,
when he appropriates the word....Prior to this moment of appropriation...(the word) exists in other people's mouths, in other
people's concrete contexts, serving other people's intentions." This view of the necessity of actively appropriating "the
word" which exists in the mouths of others fits well with Lave and Wenger's (1991) notion of learning as participation in a
community of practice. In order to learn, newcomers must be afforded opportunities for meaningful participation; however,
this may not be easy when there are oldtimers who are already experts at the community's discourse, and one must
appropriate their words. Some newcomers may be afforded more opportunities for participation than others. Communities
have unspoken but generally accepted power relations which powerfully impact perceptions of who is entitled to participate
in given situations. Toohey (2000) found that minority students' opportunities for participation were negatively affected by
ongoing subordination efforts of some mainsteam students.

MINORITY STUDENTS IN A CLASS USING KNOWLEDGE FORUM
This initial research provided only slight support for suggestions that minority students' participation levels increase when
on-line as opposed to face-to-face discourse is used. There was some indication that the slower pace of discourse was an
advantage, however, two of the three students never contributed notes to the database which were written in their own
words. As one student commented: "Um, the writing remained a long time, so I was just afraid to make any mistakes or
errors in the, in my notes so I just find the information on (the internet) and I just copy it and paste it in Knowledge
Forum." The reluctance to engage in the type of risk-taking that would have been required to make her error-prone English
public may be linked to sentiments expressed by all three students about how they believe they are perceived and treated by
many mainstream students. As one student bluntly stated: "There's racism, of course". When asked how that would affect
his participation in physics class he said he would "Maybe just, say nothing."
The experiences which the students we spoke with reported suggest that their learning was negatively affected by their
status as minority students in at least two ways. First, they must learn complex subject matter in what is for them a
relatively unfamiliar language. Second, they are subject to subordination efforts such as racist remarks and exclusionary
behaviour leading them to limit their participation, whether in face to face interaction or in on-line discourse. It is also
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  618

possible that minority  students'  contributions may elicit fewer       responses in the online discourse than   those of other
students. Further research is required to investigate this possibility.

APPROPRIATING THE WORD
This preliminary investigation of a beginning knowledge-building community has led us to renew our commitment to
investigate ways that  students are differentially able to  appropriate    classroom   discourse  and participate in classroom
activities. Research efforts are needed to find ways to empower minority students to enhance their participation, and to take
the risks which are crucial to successful learning. A shift in the way minority students are thought of has been suggested by
Ross MacDonald (1999), who called for a paradigm shift from a conception of minority students as deficient (e.g. in
language and cultural capital) to one of minority students as ambassadors to multiple ways of thinking and knowing. Such a
perspective on diverse ways of knowing fits well with notions of collaborative learning, and with the goal of enabling a
great diversity of students to come together in productive and respectful communities of practice.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the students we spoke with and their teacher for their participation in this work. This work was
supported by a Standard Research Grant to the second author and Marlene Scardamalia from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada.

REFERENCES
Gee, J.P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies. Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Toohey,  K.   (2000). Learning  English at  school:  Identity, social     relations  and  classroom   practice. Clevedon,  UK:
         Multilingual Matters.
Lave, J. &    Wenger,  E.  (1991). Situated learning:   Legitimate      peripheral participation. Cambridge     UK:  Cambridge
         University Press.
MacDonald, R. B. (1999). Fueling up at the disciplinary crossroads: Advantaging nontraditional and minority students in
         interdisciplinary programs. Bulletin of Science, Technology and Society, 19, 2, 144-146.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C. & Lamon M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the classroom into world 3. In Kate
         McGilly (Ed.) Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice. (pp. 201-228). Cambridge,
         MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
