Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page   62

B. (THEORY TRACK): THE ROLE OF ARTIFACTS IN COLLABORATIVE
LEARNING

      Contributions to a Theoretical Framework for CSCL
                                                           Gerry Stahl
                  Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology ­ FIT, Germany
                                   & University of Colorado at Boulder, USA
                                            Gerry.Stahl@fit.fraunhofer.de
                                              http://orgwis.gmd.de/~gerry
ABSTRACT
Looking at computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) in terms of (a) collaborative knowledge building, (b) group
and individual  perspectives, (c)  mediation  by  artifacts  and  (d)   micro-analysis of  conversation provides   a  rich, multi-
dimensional starting point for conceptualizing and studying a specific variant of CSCL.
These  four contributions  to CSCL   are   inter-related.  The   notion of collaborative   knowledge  building   defines a  useful
paradigm for conceptualizing learning as social practice. The social interactions and knowledge management activities in
which shared knowledge is constructed can be analyzed as the result of interweaving group and personal conversational
perspectives.  In general, collaborative  interaction   is mediated  by  artifacts: sometimes   only by transitory   artifacts like
spoken words or gestures, but increasingly by physical or digital artifacts and media. Empirical studies of collaborative
knowledge building employing micro-ethnographic analysis of speech, gesture, artifacts and media can make the details of
these collaboration  interactions visible,  highlighting    the interplay  of perspectives  and  artifacts in  the trans-personal
construction of knowledge.
A  theoretical framework    incorporating  models    of knowledge    building,  perspectives   and artifacts ­ and   grounded   in
empirical analysis of collaborative interaction ­ can guide the design of computer-based artifacts and media as support for
collaborative learning with appropriate, elaborated and unified conceptualizations.

Keywords
Collaborative knowledge building, perspectives, artifacts, conversation analysis, computer support, theory, CSCL

INTRODUCTION
I would here like to introduce four themes that play major roles in the papers for CSCL 2002 (this volume). I have come to
be  convinced  in  my    own  work that   these particular   notions   are important   for thinking  about   computer  supported
collaborative learning (CSCL) and can contribute to a theoretical foundation for advancing the field:
·   Collaborative knowledge building
·   Group and individual perspectives
·   Mediation by artifacts
·   Interaction analysis
These  themes   have been   developed   in  distinct academic    literatures (e.g., education, psychology,   activity theory   and
conversation   analysis, respectively), but I   believe    they should  be   brought  together for the  kind  of theoretical   and
methodological framework required by the complex and profoundly interdisciplinary field of CSCL.
I will present these themes in terms of four proposals ­ that would have to be investigated further in the future:
1.  The  term   "knowledge    building"  is more     concrete   and descriptive  than  "learning"   when   we  are  interested  in
    collaboration. It may also help to avoid the baggage of individualistic epistemology in favor of a social practice view.
2.  Collaborative knowledge building is structured by the intertwining of group and personal perspectives. One should
    neither ignore nor fixate upon the role of individual minds, but see them in interaction with group understandings.
3.  The construction of knowledge proceeds on the basis of artifacts already at hand ­ including linguistic, cognitive,
    cultural, physical and digital artifacts ­ and creates new artifacts to formulate, embody, preserve and communicate new
    knowledge.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page   63

4.  Naturally occurring and carefully captured examples of collaborative knowledge building ­ such as video recordings of
    classroom interactions ­ can be rigorously analyzed to make visible the knowledge building activities at work, the
    intertwining of perspectives and the mediating role of artifacts.
To some extent, these four themes each fly in the face of conventional pedagogical wisdom ­ oriented toward mental
contents of individual students ­ although they all have their respected advocates as well. Within the limited confines of
this paper, I cannot defend them against all contenders while also demonstrating their relevance and importance to CSCL. I
shall just try to motivate how they could help to clarify the domain of CSCL and define a specific approach within the field.
It should be noted at the outset that these are not intended as four independent theoretical claims; rather they contribute in a
tightly interwoven way to a single framework or paradigm for thinking about CSCL. Collaborative knowledge building
(theme a) moves away from approaches to learning focused on individual minds in two ways: first, by focusing on group
activities, which  necessarily    include  roles for  individuals within  the  groups  (theme  b), and   secondly  by  noting  the
importance of artifacts in the world, such as spoken, written or published texts that capture newly constructed knowledge
(theme c). The evidence for these views can be found primarily in the kinds of micro-ethnographic studies of learning
interactions that have recently become possible with the methods of conversation analysis using digital video (theme d).
Conversely, when applied to CSCL such interaction analysis should be guided by (a) an interest in knowledge building
activities, (b) an awareness of contrasting perspectives and (c) a focus on artifacts ­ without such guidance detracting from
the intersubjective rigor of the analytic methodology. So the four contributions shed light on one another and together
represent an integral contribution to theory.
One final point should perhaps be mentioned up front, rather than tacked onto the end as if in apology. That is, that the view
of CSCL projected here is a visionary one. Collaborative knowledge building may be a way of life on the leading edge of
scientific  research,  but it has   proven devilishly   hard to foster in contemporary   school  classrooms. The   idea that   new
technologies will transform learning practices has not yet led to the collaborative ideal. The task of designing effective
computer support along with appropriate pedagogy and social practices is simply much more complex than imagined. An
explicit,  elaborated, adopted    and actualized  theoretical   framework  is needed  to (a) clarify the nature  of collaborative
knowledge building as a desired goal, (b) indicate how people can participate in it with concrete curricular approaches, (c)
design tools to support it effectively in various contexts and (d) develop methods for observing and assessing it in practice.
Let us look a bit closer at each of the four proposed contributions to CSCL theory.

A. COLLABORATIVE KNOWLEDGE BUILDING
There are two troubling problems with the term "learning" if one wants to develop a theoretical framework for CSCL:
·   Learning is everywhere; whenever someone engages in conscious activity, one can say that learning took place in
    someone's mind. In fact, even non-conscious activity can reinforce tacit competences.
·   Learning   is never    seen;  only the  consequences     of learning  can be observed,   and they  generally  turn  out to  be
    statistically insignificant when one tries to be rigorous about this (Russell, 1999). This approach to evaluating learning
    is a hold-over from behaviorist measurement of changes due to operant conditioning (drill and practice).
In contrast, the notion of "collaborative knowledge building" seems more tangible:
·   It cannot simply be applied everywhere, but refers to specific, identifiable occurrences. Cases in which new knowledge
    is actually constructed by groups ­ rather than reified facts being recycled ­ are actually relatively rare in classrooms.
·   With care and practice, one can directly and empirically observe the knowledge being built, because it necessarily
    takes place in observable media, like talk. Moreover, it produces knowledge objects or artifacts, which provide lasting
    traces and a basis for evaluating the knowledge building.
The  term   "knowledge     building"   is  attributable to Scardamalia    and Bereiter (1991),   who  have   long  advocated   the
restructuring of classrooms into knowledge building communities and who have spearheaded the development and testing
of computer support for such communities (1996).
Their concept borrows explicitly from dominant forms of research in today's scientific communities, where theories are
progressively developed through professional discourse and inscription (Latour & Woolgar, 1979) ­ involving, for instance,
peer review and critique of papers published in conference proceedings. Here, a scientific community learns about its
subject matter by collaboratively building knowledge in the form of documents that gradually define a path of inquiry and
successively elaborate theory while also raising issues for future deeper investigation. Conflicting theoretical perspectives
are essential to the process, as are the roles of specific participants. Discourse activities ­ such as questioning, proposing,
arguing, critiquing, clarifying, negotiating, accusing, repairing, agreeing ­ are as important as the artifacts around which,
through which and into which the discourse moves.
Not  all  important   learning   is collaborative knowledge     building.  Bereiter (2002)   defines the latter in  terms   of the
development of knowledge objects such as scientific concepts and theories. This does not include the learning of passed
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   64

down facts, of practical or social skills, or of techniques of learning itself. However, social discourse about ideas ­ the core
of knowledge building ­ can certainly motivate and exercise skills like reading, writing and thinking as a side effect.
The thrust of collaborative knowledge building is to emphasize the construction and further development of a knowledge
object that is shared by the group or "learning community." The focus is not on personal learning by the participants ­ who,
it is assumed, retain some of what the group discovered, deepen their collaboration skills and enjoy positive experiences of
inquiry and intellectual engagement ­ but on the growth of communal understanding as reflected in increasingly elaborate
artifacts.4
Many   models     of curriculum   design  are compatible   with collaborative   knowledge   building,  and the  elaboration of
appropriate pedagogical practices remains an important area of active research. Progressive inquiry, for instance, dates back
to analyses of problem solving by Dewey and Pierce. This has led us to an interrogative model of inquiry (Hakkarainen &
Sintonen, 2001) based on an analysis of types of questioning according to the philosophy of science (e.g., Popper, Kuhn,
Hintikka). A systematic approach to having groups of students pursue the posing and investigation of knowledge building
questions is offered by problem-based learning, or PBL (Barrows, 1994). This approach tries to cover the breadth of a
domain (such as medical education) ­ in addition to the depth gained through explorative inquiry ­ by providing a carefully
designed set of cases as problems to be pursued consecutively.
PBL is thus a form of the case-based method (Collins & Stevens, 1983), but one which requires the student group to
become self-reliant investigators, with the teacher or tutor only facilitating the small-group process. More generally, PBL is
a specific approach to project-based learning (Blumenfeld et al., 1991), in which a group of students conducts a project. A
potential issue with project-based activities that do not adhere to a model like PBL is that tasks often get divided up so that
participants cooperate (as opposed to collaborate) on the over-all project but do not collaborate on the knowledge building;
they  may   subsequently   share  their individual expertise through  jig-sawing  (Brown  &  Campione,   1994),  but the basic
knowledge building takes place outside the group interaction.
For a theoretically grounded approach to CSCL, we may want to focus on pedagogical approaches ­ like PBL ­ that center
on group discussion as the core activity in inquiry. This discussion may take place verbally in face-to-face meetings.
However, for the sake of providing computer support (e.g., searching capabilities or customizable displays) as well as to
maintain persistence of the discourse for subsequent review and reflection, significant parts of the discussions should be
captured textually on the computer network ­ as typed minutes, chat streams or discussion threads.
Because     collaborative knowledge     building necessarily involves the use   in discourse of  concepts  whose   meaning  is
continually changing and growing, a trained observer can (given the time and tools) observe how knowledge was built up
step by step. Evidence exists in the interpretation of words, gestures and documents used. Because the knowledge was built
by more than one participant, the changing understandings of the participants had to be shared with one another and may
therefore   be available   to an  outside  observer  as well. Roschelle   (1996),  for  example, has   provided an  exemplary
demonstration of this for a pair of collaborating high school physics students (see below).
The characteristics of collaborative knowledge building just reviewed ­ that it is typical in modern science, that it is rarely
achieved in classrooms, that it can effectively motivate other forms of learning and that it can be observed in practice ­
suggest that   it might   provide a useful  pedagogical  focus  for CSCL.    Of course, the  main attraction of the  notion of
collaborative knowledge building is the hope that computer support can significantly increase the ability of groups of
students to build concepts, ideas, theories and understandings together.

B. GROUP AND PERSONAL PERSPECTIVES
After more than 2,500 years of knowledge building discourse about the nature of ideas and the meaning of meaning ­
dating back at least to the forum of Athens ­ we still find the concept of knowledge to be paradoxical and bewildering.
However, two things seem clear:
·    Wherever meaningful symbols, representations and artifacts may be found, they are only meaningful for individual
     minds. Interpretation is required, and that is necessarily carried out by individuals within the horizons of their personal
     perspectives (Gadamer, 1960/1988).
·    Isolated from social interaction, physical artifacts and historical cultures, human brains are poor thinkers and could
     never have developed into powerful minds (Donald, 1991). In fact, it can be argued that modern minds are simply

4 Koschmann, in his keynote address (this volume), would no doubt prefer the term "meaning-making" to "knowledge-
  building" because "knowledge" carries mentalistic connotations. But so does "meaning" ­ or any terms in which learning
  has been    conceptualized   in mainstream     modern  Western    thought. Bereiter's (2002)   focus on  knowledge    objects
  underlines their intersubjective, publicly accessible character. His unfortunate reliance on Popperian ontology is best
  replaced by an analysis of artifacts as physical objects embodying meaning.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page 65

   collections of cognitive artifacts internalized from inter-personal interactions (Vygotsky, 1930/1978). The mental is
   primordially a social or group phenomenon.
This means that anything like a theory of knowledge building must pay due regard to essential roles of both collaborative
groups and their individual members.
The social basis of knowledge is deeply rooted. It is not just a matter of artifacts in the world extending the limited short-
term memory of individual minds, like notes scattered about as external memory traces (Hutchins, 1996; Norman, 1993).
Meaning arises in the historically given, social world. We are from the start situated in the shared, meaningful world into
which we are born and with which we are engaged (Heidegger, 1927/1996). From the infant's first inkling of intentionality
in the mother's gesture (Vygotsky, 1930/1978), to the moment of mutual human recognition (Hegel, 1807/1967; Mead,
1934/1962), to the world-transforming paradigm shifts of expansive learning (Engeström, 1999), meaning springs from
inter-personal interaction.5
The dilemma between personal and group perspectives plays itself out on the theoretical plane as a dialectic of hermeneutic
and social-cultural approaches. Hermeneutics, as the philosophy of interpretation, is concerned with how one can interpret
the text of a distant author here and now. Heidegger's foundational analysis of human existence as an interpretive enterprise
carried  out on the   basis  of tacit,  situated pre-understanding (1927/1996)   appears   at first sight to  give priority to the
individual as grantor of meaning. However, a critical closer reading shows that the individual is always essentially engaged
in a shared world and that the network of meanings that define the individual's situation are historically, culturally, socially
defined. Thus, in his influential explication of Heideggerian hermeneutic philosophy, Gadamer (1960/1988) argues that the
possibility of understanding a distant text depends upon the author and interpreter sharing an historical horizon ­ one that
includes the historical reception of the text itself within the cultural milieu that links author and reader.
The analysis that Gadamer applies to communication across the centuries is relevant to face-to-face conversation as well.
Ethnomethodology (Garfinkel, 1967) stresses that the meaning of a communicative context is established interactively and
is achieved by the participants creating a social order "on the fly." That is, the meaning of individual utterances is not given
by some preconceived ideas represented in the speaker's mind or from her personal perspective, which are then expressed
and conveyed in verbal symbols. Rather, the meaning of the utterances is negotiated by the speaking and responding
parties; it  exists only  in  the group    perspective that is formed  by  the   intertwining  of   personal  perspectives  in the
communicative    interaction    itself. The meaning    of a specific  utterance may    be defined   and   affected by subsequent
utterances, responses, gestures, pauses, repairs, etc. (Sacks, 1992). That is, the meaning of statements made by individuals
is constructed or achieved in the discourse of the group and forms the interpretive horizon in which knowledge is shared
during   the moment    of interaction    ­ regardless  of whether  or not we    choose  to attribute  individual   learning to the
participants in the long run.
Discourse is the traditional medium of knowledge building. New ideas ­ and their interpretation by speakers and hearers ­
arise in the discourse in ways that transcend any individual's role:
   The mark of a really successful design or problem-solving meeting is that something brilliant comes out of it that
   cannot be attributed to an individual or to a combination of individual contributions. It is an emergent, which
   means that if you look at a transcript of the meeting you can see the conceptual object taking shape but you cannot
   find it in the bits and pieces making up the discourse. (Bereiter, 2002)
Clearly, each word in the discourse can trivially be attributed to an individual speaker. However, the meaning of that word
is defined by its position in the discourse context, that is, by its relationship to arbitrarily many other words (by other
individuals as well as by the word's speaker) and to the Gestalt meaning of the discourse as a whole, which is the group's,
as we shall see in the next section.
In Roschelle's (1996) analysis of the physics students, for instance, their collaborative knowledge building coalesced in the
phrase, "It pulls it." Roschelle was able to show that the students understood this to mean that the fat arrow (representing
acceleration in their computer simulation) caused a specific kind of change to the other arrow (representing velocity).
Within   the context  of  their computer    model   of Newtonian   mechanics    this change   had a  predictable   effect upon the
movement of a particle ­ and the students understood this. The statement "It pulls it" is an elliptical, indexical statement
that has little meaning on its own as an isolated sentence. In the context in which the students were collaborating, however,
it amounted to the discovery of the physics principle that acceleration is "the derivative of velocity with respect to time."
This latter way of stating it would not have made sense to these students, but only has meaning within the context of

5 The inter-personal nature of learning is established in the relationship of a young child with his or her parents. The social
can be very personal. Throughout the duration of my relationship with my parents, they motivated my attitude toward the
generation of knowledge as social praxis. I wrote the Introduction to these Proceedings on November 19, 2001, the final
day of my parents' living relationship to me, and in my mind this publication is dedicated to their memory.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   66

Newton's theories of motion and calculus. The students' statement made sense to them in terms of the components in their
computer simulation, their experience with the simulation, their previous discussion and their general world-knowledge of
pulling.
When I analyzed a discourse among five middle school students and a teacher (Stahl & Sanusi, 2001), I was at first
mystified by the cryptic interchanges in the transcript of a particularly intense and consequent collaborative moment.
Within a matter of 30 seconds, the students exchanged 24 turns at speech, mostly consisting of sentence fragments or single
words indicating  disagreement   or assent. It  was clear   that the  students   were intently engaged   and shared  a common
understanding of what was taking place in the discourse: the resolution of a knotty problem for their collaborative inquiry
and the achievement of a hard-fought consensus. But my retrospective interpretation of the transcript ­ which I developed
in collaboration with experienced conversation analysts and others ­ required a careful reconstruction of the argumentation
back several minutes as well as an understanding of the details of artifacts active in the knowledge building context. The
meaning of a given utterance was not a simple function of the words used, the propositional content, the isolated speech act
or even  a  conversational pair of  utterances. Meaning    was   a   shared, collaborative, interactive achievement.  It was  an
ephemeral, rapidly evolving group perspective.
Of course, in this analysis I was also able to track the personal perspective and personality of each participant. The flow of
discussion  as well as the individual  conversational    moves   derived   from  the  individuals in some  sense  as well. With
different participants contributing from different personal perspectives, the discourse would have been completely different.
And yet, the actual knowledge building that took place had "a mind of its own." The group perspective, which unfolded and
prevailed probably had more to do with the conceptual issues that were brought to the fore by the curriculum and by the
artifacts which set the shared context and posed the problems to be discussed than with pre-existing ideas, intellectual
orientations or personal values of the individual participants. So, while personal perspectives certainly contributed to the
discourse and left observable traces there, the interaction achieved a group perspective that determined the meaning of
individual contributions and within which knowledge was collaboratively built and comprehended.

C. MEDIATION BY ARTIFACTS
Knowledge    building is mediated   by artifacts. The    interaction and  interweaving   of personal and  group  perspectives is
mediated by artifacts. What does this mean? What is mediation and what are artifacts?
"Mediation" means that something happens by means of, or through the involvement of, a mediating object. For instance,
when a student uses a technical term to construct knowledge or when a class of students uses a software collaboration
system to discuss a theme, that term or that system is mediating the activity: It is providing a medium or middle ground
through which the students interact with their ideas. The specific form of the mediation generally affects the nature of the
activity profoundly, often determining the nature of the task itself, that is, the choice of medium can define the ends or goal
as well as the possible means. In Roschelle's example, the metaphor of pulling mediated the students' knowledge building
and allowed them to formulate a theory, to share their understanding of how the simulation worked, to bring their bodily
skills to bear, and to solve some but not all of the challenges posed by the teacher.
An artifact is a meaningful object created by people for specific uses. The term "pull" ­ as elaborated metaphorically by the
students and as operationalized by them in manipulating the computer simulation of accelerating forces ­ functioned as a
knowledge building artifact on several levels: It was a pre-understood concept that they could build upon, it provided a tool
that they could use for collaborative thinking about the simulated phenomena and it resulted in a knowledge object that
incorporated their new shared understanding.
The concept of artifact is perhaps most familiar in anthropology, where it refers to discovered objects that were made by
ancient people and that still display traces of their intended function or symbolic import. Hegel (1807/1967) spoke of
artifacts as objects on which meaningful form had been imposed and he situated the primordial act of artifact creation in the
interpersonal interaction in which people recognize each other and themselves as self-conscious actors. Marx (1844/1967;
1867/1976) took the analysis of artifacts another step to argue that their character was largely determined by prevailing
socio-economic relations, so that in our age most artifacts are produced as commodities for monetary exchange. For Hegel,
artifacts retain the externalized subjectivity in physical form, and for Marx they retain both concrete human labor that went
into producing them and the abstract value of the labor time they required.
These classic analyses of mediation and artifacts are relevant to a contemporary CSCL theory. While theory is now a trans-
disciplinary undertaking   drawing  upon multiple   traditions   in  the social, human   and natural  sciences, the  concepts of
mediation and artifact can be traced back to the philosophy of Hegel, whose dialectical analyses revealed the mediated and
historical dynamic  everywhere.  Marx   critiqued  idealist and    subjectivist  aspects of Hegel's  thought and  grounded    the
mediations in concrete analyses of historically-specific social relationships. Contemporary theories prevalent in CSCL can
be traced back to their roots in Hegel and Marx or later developments based on Vygotsky (e.g., activity theory), Heidegger
(e.g., situated theory) or Dewey (e.g., inquiry theory).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  67

Vygotsky (1930/1978; 1934/1986) wanted to supplement Marx's social theory with a psychology of mediated cognition (a
perspective on the individual as intertwined with the group perspective). He extended the notion of physical artifact (tool)
to encompass linguistic artifacts (symbols) as well. The individual's activity was then seen to be mediated by both varieties
of artifact. The human ability to use physical and linguistic artifacts is a cultural development that allowed mankind to
evolve beyond its biological basis.
Vygotsky argued ­ on the basis of empirical psychology experiments ­ that the meaning of artifacts and our understanding
of that  meaning are     first created in inter-personal   contexts, such as  mother and  child  or teacher and     student, and
subsequently may be appropriated and internalized in an individual mind. The discussion of learning in a student's "zone of
proximal development," scaffolded by a teacher, is based on this. We can call the internalized result of this process a
"cognitive artifact." For instance, a work group might develop a list of tasks or a diagram of a work flow on a white board
and a member of the group might then internalize and later mentally recall that list or diagram in order to monitor future
work. The internal mental representation is then a cognitive artifact that resulted from group knowledge building and that
may mediate subsequent knowledge building by the individual or the group. In this analysis, the mental representation is a
result of collaborative activities and did not first arise subjectively to then be expressed externally. (The deconstruction of
artifacts often shows that things developed in the opposite order from how they now appear ­ that is characteristic of the
reification of meaning in an artifact.)
A complete working out of Vygotsky's approach could portray the human mind as nothing but a growing set of cognitive
artifacts, appropriated and internalized by each of us in our personal development from our interactions with those around
us and our embeddedness in our cultural world. Vygotsky and others who investigate infant development have suggested
how even the most basic senses of intentionality, meaning and intersubjectivity may arise in interpersonal interaction ­ as
sketched by Hegel theoretically. The folk theories of mind ­ roundly criticized by Bereiter (2002), Dennett (1991) and
others ­ can be viewed as metaphors (mind as a container of ideas, a theater of experiences, a homunculus mind within the
mind) which may have served their purpose but have now outlived their usefulness. Minksy (1986), for instance, has
proposed an alternative "society of mind" metaphor to capture the computational structure of mind as a decentralized set of
cognitive artifacts.
If we adopt a Vygotskian view of mediation by artifacts, then the knowledge building process can be conceptualized as the
construction of knowledge artifacts, involving physical and symbolic artifacts as starting point, as medium and as product.
The process proceeds collaboratively and intersubjectively, within a socio-cultural context. The final knowledge artifact
may be internalized by one or more of the participants. While the internalized learning outcomes may be problematic to
assess, the shared understanding within the collaborative knowledge building is experienced by the participants and may be
subject to reconstruction from traces left in various artifacts, including video recordings and their transcripts.
The task of education in this approach is to revive meanings that have been captured and preserved in artifacts. This is the
problem of cultural transmission. Culture can be conceptualized as a body of cognitive and other artifacts. In literate
society, for instance, culture includes systems of numbers and written language. Schooling is largely the attempt to help
young students to internalize the vast repertoire of meaning that has been associated with these artifacts. Although it is
often possible for individuals who have mastered certain skills (cognitive artifacts) to develop related knowledge artifacts
on their own, it is   at other   times useful  to recreate the intersubjective conditions of knowledge  creation     in carefully
structured contexts of collaboration with well-designed mediational artifacts to scaffold further learning. Within CSCL
efforts, this would mean designing software to support the right kinds of interpersonal interaction, of mediation by artifacts
and of knowledge artifact construction.
One does not have to buy Vygotsky's whole approach as sketched out here in order to recognize the importance of an
analysis of mediation and of artifacts for a theoretical framework for CSCL. Such an understanding of artifacts as humanly
meaningful physical objects can, for instance, overcome Bereiter's (2002) dependence upon Popper's questionable "third
world" ontology of knowledge objects. Perhaps the most urgent undertaking at this time is further empirical investigation of
how artifacts and their understanding actually function in concrete instances of collaborative knowledge building. For this
we need a methodology of interaction analysis.

D. INTERACTION ANALYSIS
Roschelle presented his analysis of two students working with a physics micro-world simulation as an instance of student
learning as conceptual    change,  facilitated by  collaborative use  of  a computer artifact. One  could reconceptualize     his
analysis as an attempt by the students to rediscover the meaning or affordances that were designed into the software artifact
as a model of physics. The term "pull" which they interpreted and developed in this connection was a linguistic artifact that
they collaboratively constructed as a knowledge object and then individually internalized as an expression of their group
learning. Roschelle used conversation analysis of video tapes as well as interviews of the students to conduct his study of
the collaborative knowledge building and the internalized conceptual change.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page 68

The question of how people rediscover meaning in artifacts is an important and difficult problem. When artifacts are
created, their meaning is shared and relatively accessible. The artifact functions importantly to capture, formulate and
encapsulate that meaning. But the meaning does not remain simply available on the surface of the artifact. As a note in the
discussion database from my seminar on artifacts put it,
    Thoughts on meaning in artifacts by Bob Craig on Dec. 12, 2000
    Do artifacts "embody meaning" or do they embody meaningful traces of human activity? ... Meaning is not "in" the
    artifact; rather it is "in" the total situation that includes artifacts, minds and social practices.
The meaningful traces transform, reify, distort and hide the meanings that originally existed in the live human interactions.
New minds who encounter the artifacts must recreate the appropriate social practices, reconstruct the cultural contexts and
rediscover the meaning within their own personal and group perspectives.
To investigate how people disclose the meaning of artifacts that they do not understand, I undertook an analysis of a
specific computational cognitive artifact. I looked at how the five middle school students referred to in Section B above
struggled to uncover the structures designed into a rocket simulation. I started by trying to follow the students' knowledge
building discussion in a transcript of their discourse. But the most interesting and intense collaborative discussion was
particularly hard to interpret. The student utterances did not assume the explicit form of scientific propositions of articulate
arguments. Nor could the conversational turns be coded as coherent speech acts (Searle, 1969).
Here is the transcript of the pivotal moment of the three-hour long project with the rocket simulation:
                        1:22:05                                    Brent             This one's different
                        1:22:06                                    Jamie             Yeah, but it has same no...
                        1:22:07                                                      (1.0 second pause)
                        1:22:08                                    Chuck             ... Pointy nose cone
                        1:22:09                                    Steven            Oh, yeah
                        1:22:10                                    Chuck             But it's not the same engine
                        1:22:11                                    Jamie             Yeah it is ...
                        1:22:12                                    Brent             ... Yes it is
                        1:22:13                                    Jamie              Compare two `n' one
                        1:22:13                                    Brent              Number two
                        1:22:14                                    Chuck             I know
                        1:22:15                                    Jamie             Are the same
                        1:22:16                                    Chuck             Oh
These one-second utterances make little sense on their own. They are elliptical and indexical ­ like Rochelle's "It pulls it."
By "elliptical" I mean that these are primarily sentence fragments, phrases that may complete or be completed by another
student's utterance, but do not stand on their own. They are fragments of a discussion that is only meaningful at the group
level. By "indexical" or "deictic" I mean that they point to or intend something without explicitly stating their referent ("it,"
"this one"). They index important elements of the shared situation that it would be redundant or superfluous to name.
Where   words   and   phrases  are repeated,    the repetitions play  important    roles of indicating       agreement and shared
understanding, which is also signified by the way utterances tend to complete each other.
The discourse is only meaningful on the group level, where
the meaning  spans   individual   utterances of  individuals  and
even conversational pairs. The meaning is integrally situated
in the temporally  unfolding   group  activity,  centered on  the
simulation artifact (Vikkunen & Kuutti, 2000).
To understand what took place in this ten seconds, one must
reconstruct the argument that reaches its climax here but that
was  set up  in   the   previous  ten minutes.    (A  theoretical
foundation  for this is given  by Bakhtin   (1986),  who  argues
that an utterance is only meaningful in terms of its references
back to preceding utterances to which it responds and forward
to  anticipated responses  of   a projected    audience,  and by
Heidegger   (1927/1996),  who     situates meanings   within  the
extended dimensions of human temporality.) One must also
understand the task of the three-hour project and analyze the
affordances of   the  software  artifacts  that the students  are
working with. (Activity theory, as formulated by Engeström           Figure    1. Students  discuss       a computer   simulation
(1999),  proposes general  structures  of  the  broader  effective   artifact.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  69

context, including societal dimensions as well as the goals and tools of group activities.) In addition, it is necessary to
observe closely the bodily orientations, gaze and gestures of the students.
In Fig. 1, Brent (circled) thrusts his body forward and shifts the group's focus to a rocket description on the monitor, about
which he says "This one's different." The ensuing discussion debates what is the same and what is different about this
rocket. The rocket to which "this one" is compared actually shifts here ("compare two `n' one"), and that shift enlightens
Chuck, who has resisted the teacher and the peer group, and has long tried to promote his personal perspective. Now, his
"Oh" acknowledges a new-found acceptance of the group perspective.
A detailed analysis of this transcript would make visible the knowledge building process that took place, in which the
students displayed for each other verbally and non-verbally their shifting understandings and interactively achieved the
creation of shared meaning. This meaning was partially encapsulated in terms like "same" and "different," that took on
specific functions in their collaboration.
More generally, the elements of this kind of interaction analysis have been developed on a rigorous methodological basis
by the theory of ethnomethodology (Garfinkel, 1967) and the science of conversation analysis (CA) (Sacks, 1992). With the
availability of digital video to capture and facilitate detailed analysis of naturally occurring interpersonal interaction, the
CA approach has been combined with the study of gesture, gaze, bodily orientation, etc. into techniques for interpreting
detailed behavior known as micro-ethnography (LeBaron & Streeck, 2000; Streeck, 1983). Most communication analysis in
this tradition has studied pairs or small groups in face-to-face situations without technological mediation, although studies
of telephone conversations   played   a major  role in the early years of    CA (Hopper,   1992; Sacks, 1992). However,    the
foregoing observations on the rocket simulation discourse suggest that such methods can be applied to CSCL situations as
well ­ with appropriate adaptation. If this is done, attention must be paid to the central mediational role of digital as well as
linguistic artifacts. Also, in cases of collaborative knowledge building the unit of analysis for meanings should take into
account the intertwining of personal and group perspectives by interpreting individual utterances as elements of the larger
discourse and activity.

CSCL FOUNDATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
A theory for CSCL should help us to think about collaborative learning, to structure pedagogy, to design software media
and to study actual occurrences of knowledge building inside and outside of classrooms. I think the four foundational
themes discussed here start to address these needs. The notion of knowledge building focuses us on activities associated
with knowledge management and the further development of theories. A concern with the intertwining of personal and
group perspectives suggests curricular approaches and classroom practices that integrate individual and team efforts. The
analysis of artifacts conceptualizes the roles of CSCL systems and their databases as mediators and preservers within
processes of creating knowledge objects. Finally, interaction analysis allows one to view and assess the knowledge building
activities, the intertwining of perspectives and the mediation by artifacts.
The need for these four theoretical contributions arose for me in my work designing and deploying a CSCL software
system named    WebGuide      (Stahl,   2001). This system  prototyped  knowledge    creation  and  knowledge   management
functions that extended   a conventional    discussion forum. WebGuide        investigated methods for  intertwining notes in
personal and group perspectives, that provided interlinked organizations of shared ideas. The effort to reflect upon the
nature of the WebGuide      software I was designing led me to a view of it as a mediating artifact. Rather than trying to
analyze the complex interactions of a class using WebGuide, I started by looking at how students learned about a simpler
digital artifact, SimRocket (Stahl & Sanusi, 2001) ­ and that led me to a growing fascination with conversation analysis
and micro-ethnography. I believe that the theoretical framework that emerged from my work on WebGuide             will prove
valuable in designing and deploying the next system I will be working on, BSCL (Leinonen et al., 2001). Perhaps it can
help others as well.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The ideas in this paper grew out of collaborative knowledge building mediated by WebGuide          in a series of seminars on
CSCL at the University of Colorado. I would particularly like to thank participants Alena Sanusi, Curt LeBaron and Bob
Craig from the Communication Department as well as the teachers and students at Platt Middle School in Boulder who
were involved with SimRocket. The paper was written during my transition from L3D in USA to the GMD and the
ITCOLE Project in Europe, and therefore owes much to my long-time colleagues in Colorado.

REFERENCES
Bakhtin, M. (1986) Speech Genres and Other Late Essays, (V. McGee, Trans.), University of Texas Press, Austin, TX.
Barrows, H. (1994) Practice-based Learning: Problem-Based Learning Applied to Medical Education, SIU School of
        Medicine, Springfield, IL.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 70

Bereiter, C. (2002) Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R., Krajcik, J., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991) Motivating project-based learning:
         Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning, Educational Psychologist, 26 , pp. 369-398.
Brown, A. & Campione, J. (1994) Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.) Classroom Lessons:
         Integrating Cognitive Theory and Classroom Practice, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 229-270.
Collins, A. & Stevens, A. R. (1983) Goals and strategies of inquiry teachers. In R. Glaser (Ed.) Advances in Instructional
         Psychology, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Dennett, D. C. (1991) Consciousness Explained, Little Brown and Company, Boston, MA.
Donald,  M.  (1991)  Origins  of the Modern   Mind:   Three Stages   in the  Evolution of Culture   and Cognition, Harvard
         University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Engeström, Y. (1999) Activity theory and individual and social transformation. In Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen, & R.-L.
         Punamäki (Eds.), Perspectives on Activity Theory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 19-38.
Gadamer, H.-G. (1960/1988) Truth and Method, Crossroads, New York, NY.
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Hakkarainen, K. & Sintonen, M. (2001) The interrogative model of inquiry and computer-supported collaborative learning,
         Science & Education, in press .
Hegel, G. W. F. (1807/1967) Phenomenology of Spirit, (J. B. Baillie, Trans.), Harper & Row, New York, NY.
Heidegger, M. (1927/1996) Being and Time: A Translation of Sein und Zeit, (J. Stambaugh, Trans.), SUNY Press, Albany,
         NY.
Hopper, R. (1992) Telephone Conversation, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN.
Hutchins, E. (1996) Cognition in the Wild, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Latour, B. & Woolgar, S. (1979) Laboratory Life, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
LeBaron,  C.  & Streeck,   J. (2000) Gesture, knowledge   and  the   world.  In D. McNeill  (Ed.)   Language  and  Gesture,
         Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Leinonen, T., Hakkarainen, K., Appelt, W., Dean, P., Gómez-Skarmetav, A., Ligorio, B., Lipponen, L., Merisaari, L.,
         Mielonen,   S., Pontecorvo,  C., Sligte, H.,  & Vosniadou,     S. (2001)  ITCOLE   Project: Designing  innovative
         technology  for  collaborative  learning and  knowledge    building, In: Proceedings of    Ed-Media  2001: World
         Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications, Tampere, Finland.
Marx, K. (1844/1967) Alienated labor. In L. G. K. Easton (Ed.) Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and Society,
         Doubleday, New York, NY, pp. 287-300.
Marx,    K.  (1867/1976)   Capital,   Volume   I,  (B.   Fowkes,    Trans.),  Vintage,  New   York,     NY.  Available  at:
         http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm.
Mead, G. H. (1934/1962) Mind, Self and Society, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Minsky, M. (1986) Society of Mind, Simon & Shuster, New York, NY.
Norman, D. A. (1993) Things That Make Us Smart, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA.
Roschelle, J. (1996) Learning by collaborating: Convergent conceptual change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.) CSCL: Theory and
         Practice of an Emerging Paradigm, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 209-248.
Russell,  T.   (Ed.)  (1999)     The  No   Significant   Difference    Phenomenon,     Mindspring    Press.  Available  at:
         http://cuda.teleeducation.nb.ca/nosignificantdifference/.
Sacks, H. (1992) Lectures on Conversation, Blackwell, Oxford, UK.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1991) Higher levels of agency in knowledge building: A challenge for the design of new
         knowledge media, Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1 , pp. 37-68.
Scardamalia, M. & Bereiter, C. (1996) Computer support for knowledge-building communities. In T. Koschmann (Ed.)
         CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 249-268.
Searle, J. (1969) Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Stahl, G. (2001) WebGuide: Guiding collaborative learning on the Web with perspectives, Journal of Interactive Media in
         Education, 2001 (1). Available at: www-jime.open.ac.uk/2001/1 and
         http://orgwis.gmd.de/~gerry/publications/journals/jime2001/webguide.pdf.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                 page     71

Stahl, G. & Sanusi, A. (2001) Multi-layered perspectives on collaborative learning activities in a middle school rocket
       simulation project, In: Proceedings of 22nd Annual Ethnography in Education Research Forum, Philadelphia, PA.
       Available at: http://orgwis.gmd.de/~gerry/publications/conferences/2001/ethnography2001/ethnography.pdf.
Streeck, J. (1983) Social Order in Child Communication: A Study in Microethnography, Benjamins, Amsterdam, NL.
Vikkunen, J. & Kuutti, K. (2000) Understanding organizational learning by focusing on "activity systems", Accounting,
       Management and Information Technologies, 10 , pp. 291-319.
Vygotsky, L. (1930/1978) Mind in Society, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Vygotsky, L. (1934/1986) Thought and Language, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
