Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  627

Connecting Formal and Informal Discourses to Create Yet
                                     Another Zone of Learning
                     Hideyuki Suzuki                                            Hideo Funaoi
                     Ibaraki University                         National Institute of Multimedia Education
      hideyuki@suzuki.or.jp                                     funaoi@nime.ac.jp

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we focus on the "Question-Answer" function of the SOUTO system; the hypermedia authoring system, and
classroom activities where learners make hypermedia compositions with SOUTO and discuss their compositions with the
function mentioned above. Field tests of the system reveal that; 1. The Question-Answer function reconfigures social
relationships in the classroom and thus creates a foundation for collaborative learning, 2. The Question-Answer function
creates a field of informal talk, 3. The SOUTO system provides a foundation on which both formal and informal talks are
constituted and woven together, and thus, transition between them is enabled. Based on these findings, we suggest that
educational systems should be designed as mediators that hybridize school-like activities and non-school-like activities.

Keywords
supporting discussion, reconfiguring classroom activities, informal conversation

INTRODUCTION: CONSERVATIVE CSCL VS. RADICAL CSCL
CSCL researches can be roughly divided into two types. One is the conservative CSCL research that is based on existing
concepts of what 'learning' and 'school' are, and contributes, as a result, to maintaining the present form of school and
classroom activities. The other is the radical CSCL research that endeavors reformation of conventional school activities
and culture. This paper focuses on our project that exemplifies the radical CSCL research. In the project we are endeavoring
to reconfigure the existing relationship between learners and teachers, learners and learners as well as learners/teachers
through CSCL systems design and thus to establish yet another zone of learning in school. In the following sections, we
show (1) SOUTO system, the hypermedia authoring system, (2) how the system contributes to reconfigure conventional
social relationships in classroom, and then discuss (a) significance of less formal personal exchanges in collaborative
learning, (b) hybridization strategy for the radical CSCL research.

DESIGNING SOUTO SYSTEM AS A TOOL FOR RECONFIGURATION
SOUTO     (creator/thinker) is  a hypermedia   authoring      system
that  boasts  skeleton set   of   functions to treat    multimedia
materials and  simple  GUI   that  allows   learners to access  the
functions without difficulties. The Question-Answer function
of SOUTO is designed to facilitate learners' conversation on
their compositions.   This  function  enables  learners    to create
question   or  answer       cards  and    put  them     onto    the
questioned/answered    cards   in  a  composition    (fig. 1).  The
authors   consider     that  the     Question-Answer       function
contributes to reposition the interwoven agents, i. e., learners,
teachers,  compositions,    and    so  on,  that  constitute    the
classroom.

OBSERVATION IN SOUTO CLASSROOM                                          Fig.1: Juxtapositional view of question/answer
Commitment     to    peer   learners:   During   question-answer        cards and the composition
activities in SOUTO classroom, it was observed that learners
were encouraged to see their peer learners as audience of their compositions. The authors presume that the Question-
Answer    function, which   establishes learner-learner    information pathway, contributes to the emergence   of this learner-
learner relation.
-    Compositions as multivoiced products: In many cases information exchanged through question-answer was
     imported into their compositions when they were revised and thus the compositions were imbued with the others'
     voices. This process turned the compositions from individual facilities into collective artifacts.
Emergent region of personal talk: While formal and public language was used in compositions, vivid          colloquialism filled
with personal talk, joking, capering, decrying, and irresponsibility, appeared in question and answer cards.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 628

-   Hybrid language and hybrid identity: SOUTO system juxtaposed formal school language (compositions) with
    personal language (question-answer). On this mingled region of public and personal, learners lived two different "I"s
    simultaneously. One is the public "I" who engaged in school-like activities, the other is the personal "I" who engaged
    in emotional and private reciprocation of words with their peers.

DISCUSSION
The region of personal talk was full of the carnivalistic characteristics (Bakhtin 1968) such as abusive language, anger,
parody, mutual mockery, and degradation of authorities. In addition, it was observed that the region was ruled by laws
incommensurable with that of school-like activities. It is fair to consider that the region of personal talk appeared as the
carnivalistic world in relation to the school-like activities.
SOUTO appeared as a boundary object upon which different languages, i. e., personal language and school language were
constituted and woven together, and thus, transitions among them were enabled. SOUTO was a tool for making hypermedia
compositions into a product for classroom activity, it was also a tool for person-to-person small talk about the composition.
This hybridism allowed the students to construct their learning based on both of the regions. Hybrid tool ensures hybrid
learning.
What is the significance of this hybridism? From the viewpoint of learning through conversation, this hybridism assures
creative nature of conversation. Bakhtin (1984) discusses that carnivalistic nature is essential to creative conversation where
knowledge is constituted through the interaction/negotiation among interlocutors. From the viewpoint of school reform, this
hybridism is expected to constitute yet another zone of learning. The region of carnival is an integral part of students' lives
and their reality as  students. However, it has been excluded       when  student activities are  organized as formal learning
activities. Making learners stand between a school-like world and the carnival world provides the possibility to realize an
unprecedented learning activity with the missing part, or the region of carnival, as one of the constituents. The newly
formed zone of learning is a field where school-like activities are questioned and relativized. It is also a field where learning
is anchored to both sides of school life, i. e., classroom activities and small talk, and where the students appear as hybrid
agents.

CONCLUSION
Observation in the SOUTO classroom showed the Question-Answer function reconfigured the existing social relation in the
classroom. However, what we saw in the classroom was not a monolithic "alternative activity" brought about by the
function, but rather a continuous constitution of different regions where students stand on the intersection of these regions.
This study suggests that systems for radical CSCL should be designed as boundary objects that constructively produce
conflict between existing school activities and carnivalistic activities, and establish traffic between them. The point of this
design  strategy  is not to replace school-like activities     with "non-school-like activities", but to make  these  activities
encounter and hybridize into yet another zone of learning. It is important that, in this work, the school-like activities are not
concealed from the students, but are visualized for them and thus repositioned by the juxtaposition with the other activities.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study is supported in part by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B-11558013, 1999-2001) & (B-13558023,
2001) from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

REFERENCES
Bakhtin, M. (1968). Rabelais and his world. Iswolsky, H. (Trans.) MIT Press
Bakhtin, M (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky's poetics. Emerson, C. (Trans.) Manchester University Press
