Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 631

         Studying Social Aspects of Computer-Supported
         Collaboration with a Mixed Evaluation Approach
         A. Martínez1, Y. Dimitriadis2, B. Rubia3, E. Gómez2, I. Garrachón1, J. A. Marcos1
     1School of Computer Science Eng.        2School of Telecommunication Eng.               3 Faculty of Education
         University of Valladolid                   University of Valladolid               University of Valladolid
            amartine@infor.uva.es                {yannis, edugom}@tel.uva.es                   rubia@doe.uva.es

ABSTRACT
Studying and evaluating real experiences that promote active and collaborative learning is a crucial field in CSCL. Major
issues that remain  unsolved    deal   with the merging   of qualitative and  quantitative   methods and   data,  especially in
educational settings that involve direct as well as computer-supported collaboration. In this paper we present an evaluation
methodology   and  its application  to a university course   that took place  during the  last two academic   years. We   have
developed EL2AM, a tool that allows an automatic processing of computer logs using social network analysis. It has been
used jointly with a commercial qualitative research tool in order to support the evaluation process. Experimental results
allow us to reflect and draw conclusions on the changes of attitudes towards collaboration experimented by the students
along the course.

Keywords
  Qualitative and quantitative evaluation, social network analysis, project-based learning, ethnographic methodology.

INTRODUCTION
Evaluation of innovative curriculum experiences is a complex task that needs several perspectives in order to be fully
understood. The application of computer networks to real classrooms provides a wide range of possibilities for interaction
(Crook 1994), which demand a variety of evaluation methods. Computers can also generate automatic data logs, which
offer new opportunities for evaluation, but at the same time present problems of data management and interpretation. We
have applied social network analysis (Scott, 2000) to the automatic evaluation of participatory aspects of learning (Sfard,
98). Social network    analysis is  an approach  that focuses on   the study  of patterns of relationships between   actors  in
communities and therefore it is suitable for the study of social aspects of interactions in learning communities.
Our research goal was the study of the evolution of attitudes towards collaboration of the students in a real case that used
BSCW (http://www.gmd.de) and other telematic tools as a means of collaboration. Automatic analysis of the data logs was
complemented with traditional fieldwork data in order to study how the actual use of the software tools (measured with the
social network analysis techniques) reflected the evolution of the ideas about collaboration in the classroom.
In the rest of the paper we briefly outline the evaluation techniques and tools we have used, as well as the results of their
application to a real case.

QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
As mentioned beforehand, our approach to evaluation combines qualitative and social network analysis in order to assess
how  the educational   design   and the  tools used for its support  favour  collaboration among   students   of individualistic
tradition. Qualitative analysis was based on students' questionnaires and formal observations performed along the semester.
The  social network    analysis techniques  were  applied to  the  event logs generated   by   BSCW  and   to a  special set of
questionnaires. From all the possible social network measurements, we were interested in those giving information on
structural properties of the network, such as cohesion. We used density and degree centralisation, as they measure the
extent to which all members of a population interact with all other members (Scott, 2000). Graphical representations of the
networks called sociograms were also used in our study.
We have developed a tool called EL2AM (Event Logs to Adjacency Matrices) that performs several on the event logs
provided by BSCW. First, a parser translates the non-standard format of the original files to XML, providing a more
intuitive view and avoiding several redundancies detected in the BSCW logs. Then, a configuration module allows the
researcher to select and configure the network she wants to analyse, selecting the type of network, the period of time, and
the set of nodes to be included in the study. The above mentioned measurements are then calculated and presented to the
researcher in tables. As an additional output, EL2AM provides files in a format accepted by commercial packages such as
UCINET or Krackplot. A particular contribution of EL2AM is that it calculates measurements on two-mode networks that
other commercial tools do not provide. The results obtained with EL2AM and social network analysis have been integrated
in the qualitative evaluation using NUDIST Vivo, a well known qualitative analysis tool.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   632

This evaluation method   has  been   applied  to an educational  project in which   we    have been involved  for the last two
academic years.   It consists in the introduction   of project-based learning     with case-studies in a course  on Computer
Architecture in studies of Telecommunications Engineering of our university (Dimitriadis, Martínez, Rubia, and Gallego,
2001). In order to face the problems posed by the individualistic and passive culture in Spanish university, the project
promoted collaboration by different means. Students were organized in pairs that had to deliver three reports along the
course. A final report was written in bigger groups of up to four pairs that shared the same case study. The students were
encouraged to use BSCW to maintain asynchronous discussions and to share information. For the study, we considered
collaboration at three levels: intra-group, inter-group and at a classroom level.
With the automatic measurements we perceived a lack of use of some of the computer­mediated communication means,
which was confirmed by the overall analysis that showed that the students preferred to interact directly with their mates in
the classroom.  The   social network measurements      obtained with EL2AM        allowed us to observe  how  the  interactions
mediated by BSCW increased during the period in which the groups were writing the final report. The fact that they had a
common goal promoted collaboration, and this was reflected in the use of the system. The analysis also showed how
BSCW helped to mediate interactions in which students indirectly shared their information and ideas with the rest of the
classroom. We finally observed how the educational project and the tasks the students had to perform helped them to
develop new collaborative attitudes beyond the ones they reflected in the initial questionnaire.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented an evaluation methodology in which different views complement each other in order to gain a better
understanding  of the  processes  under   study.  Log  files give information     about the  actual use  of the computational
environment, difficult to grasp by other means; social network analysis applied to these data provides a new insight in the
social interactions that are established through the use of the tools; finally, qualitative analysis provides information that is
needed to increase the validity of the study.
The design of EL2AM, that relies on a XML intermediate file as the source of data, makes it possible to apply it to the
study of other systems, as long as they provide enough information so as to represent the interactions in the format that has
been defined. The application of EL2AM to the analysis of new systems will also help to improve the definition of the
interactions represented in the XML file.
Here we have outlined part of the results of the evaluation that was actually performed. These results have been considered
to inform the design of the new semester and the refinement of the evaluation process, which is currently taking place.
Additional information on this project can be found at http://www.infor.uva.es/~amartine/LAO.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors want to thank to Raquel Díaz, Mª José Gallego, César Osuna and to the rest of the EMIC group. Special thanks
to all the students that eagerly participated in this academic program. Partial financial support for this research project was
given by the JCYL, Spain (VA18/99, VA117/01), the Ministry of Science and Technology in Spain and the European
Funds for Regional Development (TIC2000-1054) and the EU Leonardo Programme.

REFERENCES
Crook, C. (1994) Computers and the collaborative experience of learning. London, U.K: Routeledge.
Dimitriadis, Y., Martínez, A., Rubia, B., and Gallego, M. (2001) Cooperative Learning in Computer Architecture: An
        educational project and its telematic support. In Proceedings of the Conference of Frontiers in Education, FIE
        2001, to appear.
Nurmela, K., Lehtinen, E., and Palonen, T. (1999). Evaluating CSCL log files by Social Network Analysis. In Proceedings
        of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, CSCL'99, pp. 434-442.
Sfard, A. (1998) On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher, 27, 2, 4-13.
Scott, J. (2000) Social Network Analysis. A handbook. 2nd ed. London, U.K: Sage.
