Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   637

   The Ethnography of Distributed Collaborative Learning
                                        Frode Guribye, Barbara Wasson
                                 InterMedia - Department of Information Science
                                                 University of Bergen
                                     P.O. Box 7800, N-5020 Bergen, Norway
                             Frode.Guribye@ifi.uib.no; Barbara.Wasson@ifi.uib.no
Keywords
Ethnography, distributed collaborative learning, infrastructure, computer-mediated communication

SUMMARY
A major challenge for today's researchers studying `online' learning is how to design their studies. The ostensibly simple
question of what and how to collect and analyse data becomes a major obstacle. Recent theoretical developments emphasise
that learning, communication and knowledge construction are embedded and distributed in the social and cultural context
where they `naturally' occur, and inseparable from these contexts as an object of research (see e.g. Suchman, 1987; Latour,
1987; Cole & Engeström, 1993; Hutchins, 1995). Some `ground-breaking' studies that have expanded and, to a certain
extent, had an impact    on  the  understanding  of  learning and   knowledge  construction     have   been based  on  detailed
ethnographic research (e.g., Lave, 1988; Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Ethnographic research represents a long tradition for studying various forms of social processes in everyday life situations.
Ethnography or, more generally, qualitative methods have been used extensively in educational research, for example when
studying classroom culture and interaction, but also when dealing more explicitly with technology. However, `traditional'
ethnographic approaches do not readily suit distributed ICT environments, and there are some inherent methodological
issues with which ethnographers have to deal when entering a setting in order to study distributed collaborative learning. In
this paper we argue that, by taking these issues into consideration, ethnography becomes an adequate and fruitful approach
for studying learning as process, interaction, and practice also in distributed settings.
There is a growing body of literature about ethnographic studies conducted in the fields computer-mediated communication
(see e.g. Hine, 2000) and computer supported co-operative work (see e.g. Harper, 2000). These are fields of research
closely related to CSCL and the results, findings, and experiences made in these fields are relevant for the discussion of
ethnography of distributed collaborative learning.
We   focus on studying   distributed collaborative  learning  with the techniques, methods,     and   analytical perspective of
ethnography. Distributed collaborative learning is commonly placed in hybrid settings, where the participants engage in
computer-mediated communication as part of some sort of institutionalised education. There are thus some inherent issues,
both new and old, that need to be taken into consideration when doing ethnography in distributed learning environments.
Addressing these issues, we emphasise the role of technology and information infrastructure and how this might impact the
learning situation, but also how it can be used as a resource in ethnographic research. In addition, we discuss how to
observe, participate   and  immerse  oneself in these technologically  dense  environments.     This   includes  presenting and
exploring concepts such as virtual observations and technological immersion, but also discussing more common topics like
access and the role of the researcher. Another important aspect of ethnographic studies is the devotion to an empirical
grounding of the research, which again presents methodological challenges when studying students working online and in
distributed settings.
In particular, we emphasise the specific circumstances for studying distributed learning environments as hybrid settings,
and pay special attention to the role of the mediating artefacts and how to approach these analytically. In the full paper the
ideas and methodological issues are illustrated by presenting empirical examples from and experiences made in one of our
research projects ­ DoCTA (Wasson, Guribye & Mørch, 2000). In this way we forefront ethnography as a fruitful approach
for studying and describing the complexity and contingencies of distributed learning in an informed and structured way.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research (as part   of the DoCTA   project, http://www.ifi.uib.no/docta) was  funded      by  The Norwegian   Ministry  of
Education, Research and Church Affairs (KUF) under their Information Technology in Education (ITU) program. Thanks
to Liam  Bannon,  Berner    Lindström, Hans   Christain Arnseth,   Eugene Guribye,  and      Eskil F. Andreassen   for valuable
comments on earlier versions of this paper. An earlier version of this paper was also presented at the Nordic Interactive
Research School - Discourse and Interaction in CSCL, InterMedia, Oslo, May 2001. We also want to thank the anonymous
reviewers for giving helpful feedback on this paper.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page 638

SELECTED REFERENCES
Arnseth,  H.  C., S. Ludviksen,    B. Wasson    & A. Mørch      (2001)  Collaboration and    Problem Solving  in Distributed
         Collaborative Learning. In P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings & K. Hakkarainen (Eds.), European Perspectives on
         Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning: Proceedings of Euro-CSCL 2001. Pp. 75-82.
Bannon, L. (1989) Issues in Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning. In C. O'Malley (Ed.) Proceedings of NATO
         Advanced Workshop on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning.
Bowker, G.C & Star, S. L., (1999) Sorting Things Out: Classification and its Consequences. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Burgess, R. G. (Ed.) (1982) Field Research: A Sourcebook and Field Manual. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Clifford J. &  G.E.  Marcus   (Eds.)  (1986) Writing Culture:    The Poetics   and Politics  of Ethnography. Berkeley, CA:
         University of California.
Cole, M.    & Y.  Engeström   (1993)   A   Cultural-Historical Approach    to Distributed Cognition.  In Salomon,  G.  (Ed.)
         Distributed Cognitions, Psychological and Educational Considerations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A. & O'Malley, C. (1996). The Evolution of Research on Collaborative Learning. In P.
         Reimann & H. Spada (Eds.). Learning in humans and machines. Towards an interdisciplinary learning science,
         189- 211. London: Pergamon.
Fjuk, A.  &   S.  Ludviksen   (2001)  The  Complexity  of     Distributed Collaborative Learning:  Unit  of Analysis. In P.
         Dillenbourg,    A.  Eurelings  &    K.  Hakkarainen    (Eds.),   European  Perspectives   on    Computer-Supported
         Collaborative Learning: Proceedings of Euro-CSCL 2001. Pp. 237-244.
Hakken, D. (1999) Cyborgs@Cyberspace: An Ethnographer Looks to the Future, NY: Routledge
Hammersley, M. & P. Atkinson (1995) Ethnography. Principles in Practice. London: Tavistock. 2nd Ed.
Harper, R. H. R. (2000) The Organisation in Ethnography : A Discussion of Ethnographic Fieldwork Programs in CSCW.
         Computer Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of Collaborative Computing. Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 239-264.
Hine, C (2000) Virtual Ethnography. London: SAGE
Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Jones, S. G. (Ed.) (1999) Doing Internet Research: Critical Issues and Methods for Examining the Net. London: SAGE
         Publications Ltd.
Koschmann,    T.  (1996) Paradigm   shifts and  instructional  technology: An  introduction. In T. Koschmann   (Ed.)  CSCL:
         Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm, 1-23. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Latour, B. (1987) Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Milton Keynes, England:
         Open University Press.
Lave, J. (1988) Cognition in Practice: Mind, Mathematics and Culture in Everyday life. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J. & E. Wenger (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Marcus, G. E. (1995) Ethnography in/of the World System: The Emergence of Multi-Sited Ethnography. Annual Review of
         Anthropology, Vol. 24, pp. 95-117.
Star, S. L. and K. Ruhleder (1996) "Steps toward an Ecology of Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large Information
         Spaces," Information Systems Research, Volume 7:111-134.
Star, S. Leigh, (1999) The Ethnography of Infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, Vol. 43 No.3, pp 377-391. New
         York: Sage Publications, Inc.
Strauss, A (1993) Continual Permutations of Action. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, Inc.
Suchman, L. (1987) Plans and situated actions. Cambridge University Press.
Wasson, B., F. Guribye & A. Mørch (2000). Project DoCTA: Design and use of Collaborative Telelearning Artefacts.
         Oslo: Unipub.
