Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page  639

Walk a Mile in Students' Shoes ­ An Approach to Faculty
     Development on Integrating Web-Based Collaborative
                                  Learning into Instruction
                                                C. Y. Janey Wang
                                            University of Texas at Austin
                                    JANEYWON@MAIL.UTEXAS.EDU
ABSTRACT
This presentation focuses on teachers' experiences and perceptions of their assuming the student role during an intensive
faculty development workshop. The workshop, ITESM Summer Institute, hosted at the University of Texas in Austin in
June 2001,   was  a  three-week  cross-institutional and cross-discipline  professional   faculty development   workshop    on
cooperative and collaborative learning attended by faculty members of ITESM (Monterrey Institute of Technology and
Higher Education    System) from  throughout  Mexico.    This  presentation:  (1) provides  information  about  the workshop
program, activities, and participants; (2) examines and discusses workshop participants' feedback about their learning; (3)
discusses implications for future faculty development studies.

Keywords
Web-based learning, collaborative learning, faculty development, technology integration, students' perspectives

INTRODUCTION
Integrating technology into curriculum has received increased attention over the past decade (National Science Board,
1992), as have faculty development and the integration of technology into teaching and learning. (Shapiro, 1999; Frayer,
1999) Nancy Shapiro discussed how learning communities could be extended "beyond classroom walls" while "challenging
the separateness of the curricular and cocurricular." She said, "This integration requires collaboration among administrators,
faculty, and staff responsible for the academic and social dimensions of the undergraduate experience" (Shapiro, 1999, p.
110)
Resistance to change is common in faculty development and is especially acute when technology integration is at stake. In
their discussion of resistance to faculty development, Turner & Boice (1986) suggested viewing resistance "constructively,"
distinguishing active from passive resistance, and utilizing "objective analysis" rather than "emotional reaction."

This ITESM Summer Institute was a cross-institutional collaborative effort between ITESM in Mexico, the University of
Texas at Austin, and the University of Minnesota. Hosted by U.T. Austin, the intensive three-week professional faculty
development workshop, which emphasized the integration of technology into teaching, was attended by 48 ITESM faculty
members from throughout Mexico.

FACULTY DEVELOPMENT
To  enhance  student learning,  Frayer (1999) suggested   encouraging   faculty   to network and   learn good   practices from
colleagues; stimulating faculty to refine their learning goals in relation to technology; providing faculty resources and
"technology-enhanced pedagogical strategies"; and rewarding successful practices as key strategies for creating a campus
culture conducive to assisting faculty integration of technology into instruction. As a faculty developer, Frayer (1999) said
that she found that faculty were rethinking their teaching and learning process through the implementation of technology
integration. A few approaches mentioned as catalysts to spur goal reevaluation includes school-wide integration, online
courses offerings, summer institutes for faculty, and roundtable discussions.
The  ITESM    Summer  Institute  sought to engage    teachers in intensive learning   and  hands-on  processes, to  encourage
teachers to examine the relationship between knowledge and the social-emotional aspects of learning, and to recognize and
experience the role of technology in learning. ITESM, Mexico expected its faculty members to demonstrate progress in
their instructional design utilizing strategies learned, resources explored, and realization of the changing roles of teacher. As
the catalyst for changing teacher practice, the workshop      provided participants  ­  who were  from   across Mexico    ­ the
opportunity to network with and learn from colleagues, to redefine their instruction and learning goals, and to integrate
technology into their curriculum. These workshop goals mirrored Frayer's (1999) strategies for spurring goal reevaluation.

SUMMARY
This presentation,  based on   a preliminary  study,   explores  the   perceptions   of ITESM     (Mexico) faculty  members'
experiences in assuming the role of student in an online collaborative environment where cooperative and collaborative
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  640

teaching and learning strategies and technology were emphasized. Through hands-on activities and collaborative learning
experiences, participants explored three major aspects in the workshop ­ cooperative learning, collaborative learning, and
faculty development ­ while assuming the role of student in the online learning environment.
Participants' daily workshop reflections, two end-of-workshop surveys, and the researcher's observation journal were used
as data sources to illuminate participants' experiences of and insights into "walking a mile in their students' shoes," as well
as their perceptions of the effectiveness of the workshop.
The  workshop   was  geared specifically    to assist participants in  learning strategies in the development    of Web-based
collaborative learning courses and institutional action plans. Various hands-on activities ­ both face-to-face and online ­
were employed    to engage  participating   teachers.  These  activities included cooperative-learning,   collaborative-writing,
WebQuest, rubrics design, collaborative learning project design, and institutional action plan design. Social learning, group
dynamics, and the interplay that occurred among different cultures and minds were reported as highlights of their learning
experience as students in this collaborative learning.
Among 48 participants, 15 respondents reported that prior to the workshop they were not familiar with the rubrics design,
but that after the  workshop,  participants  reported  that  they will use the  rubrics they  designed at the workshop     as an
alternative assessment tool for peer and product evaluation in their future courses. Another 25 respondents reported coming
to the realization that course design strongly influences students' learning experiences. While a well-planned curriculum is
essential, flexibility and on-going student support and feedback throughout the process are equally crucial. Superficial
interactions--rather than meaningful and constructive learning--may easily occur in the online learning environment, some
participants concluded. They indicated that instructor and facilitator feedback is even more important in the online learning
environment than in face-to-face settings.
As  administrators  and  instructors, respondents  thought   that  students'  needs are  sometimes   easily  forgotten and  that
instructors sometimes lose perspective and fail to take into account students' needs when setting course requirements and
goals. By assuming the student role, participants experienced first-hand what online learning entails, how to effectively
collaborate with others, and what they should be aware of when designing a course utilizing online learning or collaborative
learning strategies. They reported that many teachers tend to focus on cognitive and task aspects of learning rather than
socio-emotional  learning aspects.    After this workshop,   respondents   reported  gaining  a better  understanding   of time
constraints and other personal aspects of the student learning experience.
Future studies may focus on how these faculty members change their teaching practices, implement various strategies
learned directly and indirectly from this experience, and how realizations gained in this workshop impacted their post-
workshop course designs.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The ITESM Summer Institute was conducted by the Learning Technology Center director (U.T. Austin), Dr. Paul E. Resta,
Dr. Edythe Johnson Holubec of the Cooperative Learning Center at the University of Minnesota, and Dr. Marilla Svinicki
(U. T. Austin), in collaboration with Carlos Enrique, Patricia Diaz, Cecilia Valdez, and Francisco Ayala from ITESM,
Mexico. Special thanks to Rafael Cota for providing the workshop snapshots and rubric survey, and to Guillermo Espinosa
for providing information of ITESM (Mexico) expectations for participants.

REFERENCE
Frayer, D. A. (1999). Creating a campus culture to support a teaching and learning revolution. Cause/Effect, 22, 2, 10-17 &
         50
National  Science   Board  (1992).    Science  and technology     integration in  Europe   and  influences   on U.S.-European
         cooperation : a report of the National Science Board Committee on Europe in 1992. Washington, D.C.: National
         Science Foundation
Shapiro, N.  S. &   Levine, J.   H. (1999).    Creating Learning   Communities    - A   Practical Guide   to Winning   Support,
         Organizing for Change, and Implementing Programs. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, California.
Turner, Jim L. & Boice, Robert (1986). Coping with resistance to faculty development. In "To Improve the Academy ­
         Resource   for student, faculty,   &  institutional development."    A  Joint  Publications of "The    Professional  &
         Organizational Development Network in Higher Education" and "The National Council for Staff, Program and
         Organizational Development."
