Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page 644

Ethnomethods as Resources for Developing CVEs in the
                                              ITCOLE Project
                                                   Alessandra Talamo
                                     University of Rome ­ University of Salerno
                                           Alessandra.talamo@uniroma1.it
                                                Maria Beatrice Ligorio
                                                  University of Salerno
                                                      bligorio@unisa.it
Keywords: Ethnotechnology, synchronous communication, Collaborative Virtual Environments (CVEs), Conversation
Analysis
INTRODUCTION
ITCOLE is a project funded by the European community aimed at designing software for collaborative knowledge building
supporting a virtual learning community. The software is designed so to represent metaphorically the model of Learning by
Inquiry. In this paper we propose a methodology to assess the contextual uses of the software, as to further develop
synchronous communication tools.

ETHNOTECHNOLOGY AS A RESOURCE FOR TOOLS DEVELOPMENT
Synchronous communication fits the requirements of recent advances in educational research. Studying learning processes,
even more when they occur in collaborative contexts, can benefit from the study of "emic" descriptions (Duranti, 1997) of
the context itself. An emic description is the reconstruction of the meanings valuable within a community in the way that is
explicitly expressed by   the members   during    the interaction. Thus, studying   synchronous     communication   allows  the
recording of the mediated forms of talk during the interactions. Furthermore researchers are allowed to describe, in an
ecologic way, how the learning process proceeds during the collaborative work at a distance.
Ethnomethodology and discourse analysis (in that it allows emic descriptions of interactive contexts), integrated by the
recent methodological research about on-line interactions, are now considered as the appropriate methods to analyse data
from synchronous communication. From a methodological point of view, this implies the analysis of the negotiation of
shared meaning in the discursive interaction within members, while they occur. This can also allow the study of interactions
in  mediated  talk within  not-experimental   settings, like  in spontaneous     educational  communities.   Conversation   and
discourse analysis look for order and regularity in human actions, in the place of they observable intersection, that is in the
ways in which persons organize their encounters with others, in the ways they regulate the shared activity and with which
attribute meaning to artefacts, even technological, with which they interact (Schegloff, 1989). The discursive perspective
(Duranti, 1997) is able to grasp the social complexity of the negotiation practices, considering as the unit of analysis the
activity system of the community (instead of single individuals). Communities use technology in their social and material
context, attributing to them shared meanings that are developed and defined through the continuous negotiation of their
possible uses (and not-uses), benefits, disadvantages and peculiarities. This negotiation process explains how the use of
each technology is shaped and developed by different communities of practice. Pre-existing shared practices act as essential
mediators among the intended (by technical developers) meanings of technology and their actual use in the daily practice of
each specific community. In this perspective, virtual environments are not a substitute of the real experience. In virtual
environments the interaction is closely related to life out of the screen. Virtual environments are not something different
from real life, but rather, a follow up of the reality based on the additional resources coming from the interaction at a
distance (Carlini, 1998). The use of "community" as central unit of analysis of cultural ergonomics research leads to
consider   human   action as  always built by   answering  to other  persons,   in social  contexts of  inter-subjectivity (see:
http://www.vepsy.com/communication/book1/cap11.pdf)
As Grossen and Pochon (1997) propose, there is actually a need for the development of an ethnotechnology, a specific field
for studying  the  impact  of technology   raised  from  the observation    of a mismatch    among  the users'  way   of   tools'
implementation and the functions for which the developers had planned them (Gaudin, 1988). Ethnotechnology is so
conceived  as the  ethnographic  study of  the  concrete usage   of technological  solutions. Perriault (1989)  developed   the
concept of logic of usage ("logique de l'usage") in order to define the function that users assign to the technology. The
logic of usage can differ significantly from the one that the developers followed while developing the tool itself.
Grossen and Pochon (1997) highlight the following issues: (a) human-computer interaction consists "of an indirect dialogue
between  users and  designers"; (b)  This  sort of "indirect  dialogue"  is the  result of an interpretative activity based  on
reciprocal assumptions on each others representation of the tool's functions; (c) The "indirect dialogue" is developed in a
specific context (p. 283). The ethnotechnology, allows the re-construction of an "emic" description of the meanings that
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  645

users ascribe to the logic of usage of proposed tools. From this point of view, ethno methods are certainly useful to describe
in an ecologic way the context (even in its technological feaures) as the participants perceive and define it. Moreover, an
innovative use of the ethnotechnology can be foreseen by implementing the Conversation and Discourse analysis as tools
for checking and improving the usability of technological devices in a situated way. Ethnomethods highlight also the role
played by the additional resources in the interaction within the CVEs. Through conversationa and discourse analysis, it can
be observed how those additional resources (for instance the graphical dimension or the chat on-line) can be used in a
strategic way during the interaction at a distance. Recent studies (Talamo and Ligorio, 2001; see also Talamo and Ligorio,
2001 available in:
http://susanna.catchword.com/vl=7522993/cl=38/nw=1/rpsv/catchword/mal/10949313/v4n1/contp1-1.htm),            show     how
specific aspects of visual interaction, such as the visualization of the virtual objects or the embodiment of the users in the
avatar, are rhetorically made salient during the interactive discourse, depending on the content discussed or on the goals
participants have in mind.
TESTING MEMBERS' USAGE
We plan to use Conversation analysis for testing some functionalities of the ITCOLE environment. Conversation analysis
allows to  investigate some  basics  aspects of interaction   in technological  environments,  such as: (a)  the interactive
functionality among users; (b) the interactive functionality between users and the technological solutions developed, (c) the
users' interaction with virtual objects; (d) the tutoring functions of teachers and project managers, (e) how the leading
learning theory (learning by inquiry) is perceived by users.
The qualitative data are then actively included in planning strategies as resources for connecting developers' representation
of users' need  and  expectations, and to  make  the tools   more  effective. Some  examples  will  be provided  during the
presentation.
Based on these assumptions, the methodology chosen in designing the ITCOLE software takes in account contributions
from the users' experience of the synchronous environment. Usually, the external representation of objects included into the
interface is completely in charge of the software designers. In the ITCOLE project the way in which users implement the
software is intended as their "voice" in designing the technological environment.
REFERENCES
Carlini, F. (1998) Un plus di realtà [More than real], in: Jacobelli, J. (ed.) La realtà del virtuale [The real of virtual], Bari,
       Laterza.
Duranti, A. (1997) Linguistic Anthropology, Cambridge Mass, Cambridge University Press.
Gaudin, T. (1988) Les Métamorphoses du future, Paris, Editions Economica.
Grossen,  M., and  Pochon,  L.O.   (1997) Interactional Perspectives on   the Use  of Computer  and  on  the Technological
         Development of a New Tool: The case of Word Processing, in: Resnick, L.B., Salijo, R., Pontecorvo, C. and
         Burge, B.  (Eds.) Discourse,  Tools and Reasoning.      Essays on Situated Cognition, NATO     ASI  Series, Berlin,
         Springer, 265-287.
Perriault, J. (1989) La logique de l'usage, Essay sur les machines a communiquer, Paris, Flammarion.
Schegloff, J.(1989) Harvey Sacks' lectures on conversation: an Introduction/memoir, Human Studies, 12, 185-209.
