Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page 648

           Interaction Repertoire in a Distance Education
                                          Community
                                               Lars Svensson
                               Laboratorium for Interaction Technology
                                   University of Trollhättan Uddevalla
                                           lars.svensson@htu.se
ABSTRACT
This paper presents results from a study focusing on text-based electronic interaction in a distance educational setting. The
analysis of the interaction identifies three typified genres, labeled Query, Feedback and Smalltalk. Together they constitute
a shared interaction repertoire with marks of a new social landscape for education with changes in roles and behaviours that
are important to grasp for designers as well as teachers.

Keywords
Interaction, Community, Distance Education, Genre, Social Situation

INTRODUCTION
Over the last years, the Internet has become a melting pot where traditional media has merged and collided, resulting in
fruitful combinations and new functionality (Braa et al. 2000). From the perspective of Distance Education this means a
technological platform with support for dynamic distribution and organisation of hypermedia course material, but also
support for more flexible interaction, e.g. chat-rooms, computer conferences and news groups. The use of ICT should not
be understood merely as neutral improvements in educational efficiency, but also in terms of changes to the social systems.
When communicative patterns change, social and cultural change follows (Sproull and Kiesler 1991). A similar point is
made by Meyrowitz (1985) who claims that the use of an electronic media changes and restructures the social situation with
respect to the available social information, the audience and the different roles that defines the situation. And indeed, the
perhaps most important outcome from using the Internet in Distance Education, is the social dimension it has introduced.
The ease, at which informal contact can be initiated amongst students and teachers, is in strong contrast to the demand of
structure and planning, necessary in distance education based on correspondence or teleconferencing. Subsequently, the
web has become a media where learning communities can form and evolve.
In previous research on interaction within an educational setting, the focus is often set on interaction processes directly
relating to the technology-mediated collaborative learning activities themselves. For instance, Baker et al. (1999) explores
how students need to engage in processes of grounding, i.e. the interaction necessary to establish sufficient common ground
to complete a collaborative task and Wasson and Mørch (2000) presents collaborative patterns expressed by small groups of
students using various types of groupware. Furthermore the research has been dominated by an emphasis on control and
rigour, using voluntary subjects and constructed tasks for experiments with short duration. There is a need to complement
this research with studies that expands beyond such narrow foci to encompass longitudinal studies of all processes within
the practise of education, and to study how groups of "real" students in real situations choose to use and make sense of ICT.
Such a holistic perspective is argued to be vital in order to understand today's distance education as a social practice
(Wenger, 1998) where motivation, engagement (Nuldén, 1999) and relations play a central part in a distributed learning
community.

THE CASE
The object of the study presented in this paper is a distance course in Mathematics and Statistics. It is the first course in a
three-year program for 52 students located in six communities in the vicinity of a Swedish University college. The primary
technologies used in the course were videoconferencing and a system for web based education, called DisCo. The system
provides a web site with course material and support for communication, primarily through email and a threaded discussion
forum. Drawing on the concepts of genre repertoire proposed by Yates and Orlikowski (1994) the text-based interaction
between students and teachers were analysed in order to identify typified patterns that could be said to constitute genres of
communication.
The email interaction and the entries on the discussion board showed three fairly distinct genres of communication (Query,
Feedback and Smalltalk). Together these genres constitute       a repertoire for electronic interaction within the course
community. The elements and characteristics of this repertoire paints a picture of how community members (students and
teachers) accomplish their work, and in what ways the use of electronic media associates to changes in work practice and
interaction norms (Orlikowski & Yates 1994, Meyrowitz 1985).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  649

DISCUSSION
The Query genre is at the core of the collective goal of meeting the objectives of the course curriculum. In doing so students
use their community of peers and teachers as collaborative resources, (Fjuk, 1998). In addition, the rich occurrence of
Smalltalk and Feedback that were found shows how students are motivated to engage in the creation and maintenance of a
mutual community. This community building involves several mechanisms of establishing a "we-notion", thereby creating
boundaries and identity for the community, (Wenger, 1998). It also involves the development of a shared vocabulary and
indexicality (Star, 1999). Smalltalk is argued to relate to the processes of creating identity and interpersonal relations.
Feedback,  is about   the ability to influence and shape the community    culture, where       discussions could be seen as
negotiations of what constitutes the norms of the community, (Wenger, 1998, Orlikowski & Yates, 1994). The discussion
forum provided a shared arena where the community history could be exposed, and an interaction repertoire that made
common sense to the community could be negotiated.
The data  is  not the result of a  well-designed and controlled experiment, but rather an      emergent and   non-moderated
expression of student-initiated interaction, which is argued to add substantial validity to the interaction repertoire as being
rooted in realistic conditions. This does not imply that the genres are generic and exhaustive, and the most interesting
aspect is not the composition of genres, but rather the actual use (Orlikowski & Yates 1994). The novelty of the social
situation (Meyrowitz 1985) is partly relating to the way the genres coexist, thereby mixing activities traditionally typical for
a classroom, an evaluation questionnaire and a student café. It also relates to the public nature of a shared discussion forum
where the entire community is the audience of activities that are traditionally more private.
This could imply that design of software and course concepts should appreciate the potential of moving beyond the roles
and behaviours of traditional schools and classrooms. Embracing and inviting socialising behaviour such as the Smalltalk
and Feedback genres found in this study, rather than isolating it to separate digital cafés not only helps in attracting students
to common discussions but also aids in the negotiation of a common ground that is essential for collaborate learning.

REFERENCES
Baker, M.& Hansen, T. & Joiner, r. & Traum, D. (1999) The role of Grounding in Collaborative Learning Tasks. In
         Collaborative Learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches, pp 31-63, Amsterdam, Pergamon
Braa, K & Sørensen, C & Dahlbom, B (2000) The Planet Internet, Challanges Facing Informatics, Studentlitteratur, Lund
         Sweden
Nuldén, Urban (1999) e-ducation, Gothenburg Studies in Informatics, Report 15, Gothenburg University, Sweden
Orlikowski, W & Yates J. (1994). "Genre Repertoire: The Structuring of Communicative Practices in Organizations,"
         Administrative Science Quarterly 39: 541-574.
Sproull, L &   Kiesler, S  (1992)  Connections:  New ways of working   in the networked        organization. The MIT  press,
         Cambridge, Massachusetts,
Star, S. L. (1999) It's Infrastructure all the way down, American Behavioural Scientist, 43: 377-391.
Wasson, B. & Mørch, A. (2000) Identifying collaborative telelearning scenarios. Journal of Educational Technology &
         Society, 3 (3) IEEE, USA
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity, Cambridge U P, NY, USA
Fjuk, A. (1998) Computer Support for Distributed Collaborative Learning: Exploring a Complex Problem Area, Dr. Scient.
         Thesis 5, University of Oslo, Dept. Of Informatics, Norway
Meyrowitz, J (1985) No Sense of Place: The Impact of Electronic Media on Social Behaviour, Oxford UP, NY, USA
