Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 652

 Computer Support for Participatory Designing ­ A Pilot
                                                     Study
      Pirita Seitamaa-Hakkarainen 1, Henna Lahti 2, Marjut Iivonen2, Kai Hakkarainen3
                   1 Savonlinna Department of Teacher Education, University of Joensuu
               2 Department of Home Economics and Craft Science, University of Helsinki
                       3 Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki, Finland
                                              Henna.Lahti@Helsinki.fi
ABSTRACT
The present study analyzed whether and how students working in the collaborative learning environment (Future Learning
Environment, FLE2) were able to share their design process with the intended user of the product. Six teams of first-year
university-level textile students (N=24) participated in design course, in which they solved an authentic design task --
designing bags of  EuroCSCL   conference.    The methods   of social network  analysis were  applied to  study interaction
between all participants. A qualitative content analysis was carried out by analyzing the interaction between statements
posted to the FLE2 database by two of the design teams. The results indicated that in the case of more successful group, the
expert user took a role of co-designer by participating in the design process through evaluating ideas produced by students.

Keywords
Collaborative designing, knowledge-building environments, participatory design

INTRODUCTION
Collaboration is essential aspect of professionals' practical activity in the field of modern design. The idea of giving an
"expert user" an important role in designing relies on the notion of participatory designing. Participatory design emphasizes
the importance of acquiring relevant information from the end user of the product and ensuring that the product manifest
the end user's viewpoint. The present study aimed to investigate aspects of teacher and expert users role in a participatory
design process, specifically: 1) to explore how teacher and expert users worked in the virtual design environment to jointly
advance students' design process; 2) to investigate the participatory design and the expert users' contribution to the design
teams' collaborative design process.
The present  study relies on the     Future Learning Environment     FLE2   (Leinonen, Mielonen,   Seitamaa-Hakkarainen,
Muukkonen, & Hakkarainen, 1999; http://FLE2.uiah.fi). The data were collected from a 13-week collaborative design
course, and students were using FLE2 -environment during design process. In the study the participants were 24 first-year ­
university students and the students worked in six design teams. The design task was a very authentic and complex --
design task: the students were asked to design and produce functionally and aesthetically delightful conference bags to the
EuroCSCL conference. Each of the teams had its' own "expert user" (i.e., an avid conference goer), and they participated in
the design process by providing information about conference bags and conferences in general in the FLE2- environment.
In order to analyze the participants' role in the social interaction of networked designing the social network analysis (Scott,
1991) was used to study participants' social position in the collaborative design process. The participants' positions in the
networked discussions were analyzed using Freeman's degree as a centrality measure. The second level of analysis i.e.,
qualitative content analysis was conducted to teacher's and expert users' participation in design process. This detailed
analysis was, limited to the database produced by two of the design teams, teacher and expert users. We selected team 1 and
2 because expert users appeared to participate rather actively in these teams. The knowledge-building messages posted to
the database were segmented into propositions representing one main idea (Chi 1997). The classification schema consists of
several categories but we are limiting our results analysis only one category. The reliability of classification; the coefficient
for rater agreement was .88, which was considered satisfactory.

RESULTS
The entire database consisted of 211 Knowledge Building messages. The students posted 149 messages, on average 6.2
messages per student (minimum was 0, maximum 26 messages) to FLE2's database during the course. The teacher posted
35 messages, and the expert users posted 27 messages. Team members' activities and expert users' participation varied
considerably from  one team  to another.    The analysis indicated that the participants' social network had   a relatively
centralized structure (92% in the case of sent, and 82% in the case of received messages). The teacher's extremely high
betweenness value indicates that she was mediating information between the teams and expert users. The students did not
actively comment on design process across the teams. Team 4 appeared to be the most productive in posting KB messages,
and the number of their sent and received messages was higher than those of other teams. Team 3 did not participate in
virtual designing as actively as the other teams. Teams 1 and 2 appeared to have most active expert users, whereas in Team
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page 653

6's expert user did not participate (for technical reasons) in the ongoing discussion. The analysis indicated that the students'
network of interaction was not very dense; specifically, 0.22 (SD =0.86) for symmetrized data (direction of commenting
ignored). Detailed analyses indicated that the teacher distributed her coaching efforts equally across design teams.
We analyzed more closely two design teams, with respect to interaction between the teacher and the users. Teams 1 and 2
posted 72 knowledge-building messages, consisting 293 design statements. There appeared to be significant differences
between the teams' designing concerning how student used information and acquired knowledge as well as feedback from
the  expert  users (df=7; 2=  46.3;  p<  .001). While all  teams  were  provided      information  of   expert users' conference
experience,  only  Team   2 explicitly requested  experts  to comment   on      their design.  The teacher's   and expert  user's
contribution to Team 2's design process appeared to focus on helping to evaluate students' ideas. Moreover, Team 2
students also asked for more feedback (f=14; 8%) from their fellow members than did Team 1 (f=4; 3%). Both teams
received an approximately equal amount of statements representing expert users' experience during their designing and
both expert users were active and supported students' designing by providing their own experiences with conference bags.
Team  1  acquired,   however,  much    more   information  from  the users      outside the    present network  environment    by
interviewing some other conference goers (f=24; 20%). In the case of Team 2, the expert users gave feedback about the
students' ideas twice as often (f=31; 18%) as in the case of Team 1 (f=9; 8%). Team 1 produced design ideas, but they did
not ask for any direct feedback for their ideas, from the teacher or the users.
DISCUSSION
In general, it appears to us that participatory designing (i.e., including the expert user as a designer's partner) is indeed
possible to arrange in the FLE-environment. Our previous studies have indicated that there are two important aspects of
designing that virtual design environments may scaffold: defining the design context and acquiring new information. In the
case of Team   2's  design  process, the expert user directly  provided  his    or her  own    experiences and  feedback  for  the
participants about  their solutions. Students of Team    1 also acquired  outsider      users' experiences  but did   not rely on
interaction with the expert user while testing their design ideas. In Team 2's design process, the teacher and user became
more  involved  in  the students' designing since  they  were  actively invited    to  the discussion   of the relative merits of
solutions. The user and teacher became more co-designers with the students even if they did not directly provide new
solutions or sketches. An essential aim of the present study was to facilitate direct student-expert partnership, i.e., provide
the students with access to authentic expert users' knowledge so that the student designers might apply it. In the present
case, however, the activity of the user also varied: Either the student did not ask the active user's contribution, or the
volunteer expert user did not have enough time to participate in the virtual design process. It might be important to improve
the participants' awareness of what is going on within a networked learning environment (e.g., setting up a notification
system that transmits information about students' activities to the expert users), so that very busy experts could follow what
students are doing and provide timely feedback for students.

REFERENCES
Chi, M. T. H. (1997) Quantifying Qualitative Analyses of Verbal Data: A Practical Guide. Journal of the Learning Sciences
        6, 271-315.
Leinonen, T., Mielonen, S., Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., Muukkonen, H., & Hakkarainen, K. (1999) FLE ­ Tools Prototype:
        A    WWW-Based      Learning   Environment   for Collaborative  Knowledge       Building,  Proceedings    of  ENABLE99
        (Enabling Network-based Learning), June 2-5, 1999 Espoo, Finland.
Scott, J. (1991). Social network analysis. A Handbook. London: Sage Publications.
