Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                 page    654

  Collaborative Problem Solving using an Open Modeling
                                                              Environment
                                C. Fidas1, V. Komis1, N.M. Avouris1, A. Dimitracopoulou2
                                                1University of Patras, Patras, Greece
                                             2 University of the Aegean, Rhodes, Greece
  fidas@clab.ee.upatras.gr, komis@upatras.gr, N.Avouris@ee.upatras.gr, adimitr@Rhodes.Aegean.gr

ABSTRACT
An innovative learning environment, enabling collaborative modeling activities, is introduced in this paper. ModelsCreator
3.0 (MC3) supports semi-quantitative, quantitative and qualitative reasoning during modeling activities of collaborating
young children.     MC3       is also  an  open environment          in terms        of primitive modeling    entities, models    and  collaborating
partners. Synchronous modeling activity can be performed at a distance using MC3, based on a mechanism of light multiple
processes (reactive agents) residing in collaborating hosts.

Keywords: Computer supported collaborative learning, open learning environments, computer supported collaboration,
semi-quantitative modeling
INTRODUCTION
A number       of software      tools have   been  developed         during    the    last years  that  support learning   through    modeling   (e.g.
Teodoro, 1997). ModelsCreator (MC) is a learning environment that supports expression of different kinds of models,
mostly for students 11-16 years old. It integrates dynamic models: semi-quantitative, quantitative, and executable decision
making models as well as static qualitative models (concept maps), with special emphasis on semi-quantitative modeling
(Komis et al, 2001, Dimitracopoulou et al, 1999). The most recent developments of ModelsCreator (MC version 3.0, MC3),
reported here, have been in two directions: (i) Transformation of MC in an open modeling system and (ii) support for
synchronous and asynchronous collaborative development of models by distant groups of young students.

OVERVIEW OF THE MC3 ARCHITECTURE
MC3 permits the collaborative building, testing and validation of models. The main functionality of the environment relates
to the Activity Space where the models can be built, shown in figure 1. This space contains tools necessary to construct
                                                                                           models, tools to represent models in alternative ways
                                                                                           and tools that can run the models. In order to design
                                                                           Control of      a model, students have to insert primitive entities, set
                                                                             Action-       their properties and create relations between them. A
                                                                          enabling key     part of the library of available primitive entities is
                                                                                           shown on the left of the Activity Space, in figure 1,
                                                                                           while on the right there is the list of available (semi-
                                                                                           quantitative) relations. The relations are represented
                                                                   Chat tool
                                                                                           through   symbols.   For     instance, the   relations  of
                                                                                           analogy   or inverse analogy     are represented  by   the
                                                                                           symbols:, , (see figure 1) expressing reasoning
    Library ofprimitive                            Library ofsemi-                         such as: "If one entity increases, the other one might
     entities                                    quantitative                              increase, or decrease". The students can use a variety
     (a part)                                      relationsCollaborative                  of  simple     relations  that  correspond    to  hidden
                       activity                                                            algebraic formulas.
                        space
                                                                                           MC3 is an open modeling system since it provides
  Figure      1.  The ModelsCreator        v3. User        Interface during                the possibility  through   an   entity editor   and   open
  model building                                                                           libraries   to   create  new    entities   with  various
                                                                                           properties   and behavior    as well   as new compound
                                                                                           entities, models   and   problems.     The  MC3   system
architecture and functionalities that enable this open character are: (i) A repository of publicly available modeling entities
that has been created and made available to the learners community in a common Server, (ii) Search mechanisms and web-
based interface to this repository, (iii) provision has been made to support unique identities (GUID) of any developed object
(entities, models,    problems)       at the local host       level, and     entities-exchange    mechanisms       have been  established   (iv) user
protocols of collaboration for synchronization of shared activity space and online update of users' heterogeneous libraries
have also been defined.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   655

Collaboration   in MC3    is enabled  both   through  asynchronous  and  synchronous   interaction   of distance  partners. The
integrated chat facility, shown on the right of figure 1, permits exchange of free-text messages between collaborating
partners. Also a synchronous and asynchronous object exchange tool has been implemented. The Activity Space in this
case becomes a drawing space of synchronous collaboration, in which one of the two collaborating partners can insert
primary objects (concepts and relations), through direct manipulation. The supported protocol of interaction permits to the
two   partners to  exchange  roles,  playing either the passive  or the active role.  The active partner  is the  one  who   can
manipulate objects in the activity space. Variations and enhancements of the standard protocol involve a mechanism for
interleaving text messages and action in the form of sticky notes (see Fidas et al. 2001). Additionally alternative protocols
for controlling ownership of parts of the model have been devised, so that collaborating partner cannot modify parts of the
solution that have been built by another partner. These also support the collaboration analysis framework OCAF, discussed
in Avouris et al. (2002).

CONCLUSIONS- EVALUATION STUDIES
The MC3 environment presents many interesting new features that need to be extensively evaluated. The first phase of this
evaluation, involved experimentation with specific functionalities. One experiment studied the effect of heterogeneous or
missing primitive object libraries in problem solving. The result of this experiment was that the available functionality and
tools allowed   students  to proceed  with   building models  by  collaboratively searching  for missing  primitive  objects  or
develop new ones at run time, when required. One remark relating to this experiment concerns the extensive use of text-
based messaging tools in this cognitively demanding activity. A second experiment involved variations on the solution
ownership protocols. It was proven that even slight variations of the developed interaction protocols affect the use of the
tools and pose new demands in terms of cognitive tasks requested by the users. More experiments and investigations are
currently planned, exploring grounding mechanisms during individual and collaborative construction of new primitives
(entities and  sub-models)   for problem   solving  and  modeling   in sciences.  The creation   and use  of these  constructed
primitives during various collaborative modes constitutes also a research direction for our team. Additionally an extended
large scale use by learners communities of five European countries is planned in the frame of a new European project.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial  support  has  been  provided   by  the IST2000-25385/ModelingSpace      Project  of the   European    Union and   the
ModelsCreator/Pinelopi Program of the Greek Ministry of Education.

REFERENCES
Avouris   N.M.,   Dimitracopoulou    A.,  Komis   V., Fidas   C. (2002), OCAF:    An   object-oriented   model   of analysis of
          collaborative problem solving, Proceedings CSCL 2002, Colorado, January 2002
Dimitracopoulou A., Komis V. Apostolopoulos P. & Politis P. (1999). Design Principles of a New Modelling Environment
          Supporting Various   Types   of Reasoning    and Interdisciplinary Approaches,  in Proc.   of 9th Int. Conference   of
          Artificial Intelligence in Education, IOS Press, Ohmsha, pp. 109-120.
Fidas C., Komis V., Avouris N.M. (2001). Design of collaboration-support tools for group problem solving, Proceedings
          PC HCI 2001, December 2001, Patras, Greece.
Komis   V.,  Dimitracopoulou     A., Politis P.,  Avouris  N. (2001).  Expérimentations   exploratoires  sur l'utilisation  d'un
          environnement informatique de modélisation par petits groupes d'élèves, Sciences et Techniques Educatives, Vol.
          8, no 1-2, pp.75-86.
Teodoro V.D. (1997). Modellus: Using a Computational Tool to Change the Teaching and Learning of Mathematics and
          Science, in "New Technologies and the Role of the Teacher" Open University, Milton Keynes, UK.
Full paper at: http://www.ee.upatras.gr/hci/Publications.htm
