Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page  656

               Talk, Silence and the Study of Situated Action
                                                         Ivar Solheim
Department of Educational Research, University of Oslo and Norwegian Computing Center1 solheim@nr.no

ABSTRACT
This theoretical   paper discusses  some    conceptual  and epistemological     issues in the  study of  situated action in CSCL
environments, especially focusing on ethnomethodology (EM) and conversation analysis (CA). It is argued that EM and
CA approaches provide relevant and fruitful research strategies and methodologies. Some theoretical and epistemological
peculiarities, weaknesses    and biases  of  the approaches  are   identified and   discussed. Finally,  activity theory is briefly
discussed as a potential alternative methodological and theoretical approach.

Keywords
Situated action, discourse analysis, ethnomethodology, conversation analysis, computer supported group work.

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
The ideas discussed in this paper have partly been inspired by some concrete methodological challenges that I have met in
my study of the interaction between computers and students in classrooms. A basic challenge for my methodological
framework rooted in analysis of talk-in-interaction, was the fact that the students I observed only talked occasionally to
each other  during    their work.   This raises  of course  some    specific  methodical   issues concerning    application of  the
appropriate devices for mapping the interaction. Obviously, a mere recording of the talk is in this case not sufficient as a
tool to map the actual interaction going on in this group. I chose, probably appropriate, to use video camera to tape the
interaction between the students and the computers in order to map not only the interaction with the computers, but also
non-vocal communication, gestures, gaze, the character and function of hesitations and absences etc.
However, these more methodically and technically oriented issues are not my main concern in this paper. It seems to me
obvious  that  it would  be   wrong  to  reduce  my  problem    to merely a   question  of  finding the  appropriate methods   and
techniques for mapping the interaction. Several broader methodological, epistemological and philosophical issues must be
addressed. For example: Are the conceptual tools of CA appropriate for analysing silence and unspoken utterances? To
what extent can pupil's learning processes be accounted for within this framework? What is the epistemological status of
spoken utterances compared to the unspoken within the framework of CA? Is the methodical strategy of CA focusing on
moment-to-moment turn-taking in talk neglecting the importance of other significant, but less observable structures? Most
fundamentally,    to what   extent can  the possible   constraints of  CA  as   an empirical   strategy reflect more  fundamental
challenges or problems in the philosophical and epistemological foundations of EM/CA?

A DISCURSIVE ANALYTIC PERSPECTIVE ON SOCIAL ACTION AND LEARNING
Inspired by    Wittgenstein's later writings,   Harold Garfinkel's  ideas of    ethnomethodology,    and especially  the ideas  for
discursive psychology    (Edwards,   1996,   Potter and  Edwards,   1992),   my  work   has been  based  on  an   understanding of
language as action and talk as accountable action reflecting the participants' own concerns, orientations and intentions.
According to this view, the researcher should not look for "hidden" representations and motivations or unobservable social
structures, but concentrate on the accountable, observable, and detailed talk-in-interaction of people, in my case interaction
between students doing computer assisted project work. I have been particularly attracted to CA, which has been presented
"as a solution to EM's problem of the 'invisibility' of common sense" (ten Have, 1990). This approach directs the focus on
the detailed interaction and construction of meaning through talk. For example, if one wishes to study how or to what extent
students "learn" in the interaction with computers, the researcher should be paying attention to what students are actually
doing and saying when they use computers in their daily work.

DISCUSSION
In a critical discussion of EM and CA, I relate my arguments loosely to my initial methodological problem of applying
EM/CA in a context where the participants evidently do communicate in their cooperative work, but where this only to a
very limited extent is reflected in "ordinary" conversation between the members of the group.
I appreciate CA as a part of the methodical fundament of discourse analysis. But as I read the works of many conversation
analysts and   ponder  the   character  of  the research program,    I am  increasingly    struck by a   peculiar narrowness   and
disembodied, and to some extent empiricist, character of many CA studies. In my view this is due to certain theoretical

1 In the academic     year  2001   and  2002  I  am a  visiting researcher   at the Center  for   Lifelong Learning  and    Design,
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado et Boulder. Email: ivar@cs.colorado.edu
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page   657

peculiarities and biases, more specifically the idea of rationality as accountability, the premise of the knowledgeable actor
and the exaggerated epistemological and methodological status of speaking turns and sequential organisation of utterances.
In particular, and  here I follow Michael     Billig's (1997)  critique,    the study  of central  issues as  repression  of
knowledgeability  and absences and  silence    in dialogues, seem to       require additional or alternative theoretical and
methodological frameworks.
Activity theory has been presented as an alternative to CA and discourse analysis (Engeström, 1999), but in my view
activity theoy does not offer significant insights in the study of the finegrained aspects of sociality and human interaction,
especially human-computer interaction, which is the focus of the present paper.
By way of conclusion, I consider EM and CA to be highly relevant and valuable research strategies and methodologies in
the study of situated interaction, and especially in CSCL environments. The major strength of CA lies in the idea that
conversational meaning is to be situated in the sequence. Its most powerful idea is undoubtedly that human interactants
continually display to each other, in the course of interaction, their own understanding of what they are doing. This, among
other things, creates room for a dynamic, interactional view on human-computer interaction. EM and CA seem particularly
relevant to the study of human-computer interaction since these processes are often complex to analyse because also the
computer is involved as an interactant in its own right, albeit not human.
For the further development of CA within a discursive analytic framework it seems important to also include analysis and
interpretation of "unspoken utterances" which are not directly observable, but which leaves traces. Theoretical concepts
from e.g psychoanalysis and rhetorics, may seem relevant in addressing the challenges presented in the beginning of this
paper (for other phenomena, other theories may seem interesting). But a prerequisite for such application of theory should
be that the inferences and theorizing are derived and traced from actual interaction in its situated context, non-vocal or
vocal.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Hans Christian Arnseth, Vibeke Grøver Aukrust, Sten Ludvigsen, Roger Säljö and Svein Østerud, for helpful
suggestions and comments on a previous version of the paper.

REFERENCES
Billig, M. (1997) The dialogic unconscious: psychoanalysis, discursive psychology and the nature of repression, British
   Journal of Social Psychology, 36, 139-159.
Billig, M. (1996) Arguing and Thinking, 2nd Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Edwards, D. and Potter, J. (1992) Discursive Psychology. London: Sage.
Edwards, D. (1996) Discourse and Cognition. London. Sage
Engeström, Y. (1999) "Communication, Discourse and Activity" (manuscript)
Have, P. ten (1990) 'Methodological issues in conversation analysis', Bulletin de Méthod.Socio., Nr. 27 (June): 23-51
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Schegloff, E. 'Whose text? Whose context?', Discourse & Society (1997) 8: 165-87,
Suchman, L. (2000) Embodied Parctices of Engineering Work. In Mind, Culture and Activity, 7(1&2)
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
