Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 658

Resources for Coordination in Collaborative Telelearning
                                                     Rune Baggetun
                                                      InterMedia
                                               University of Bergen
                                                   runeb@ifi.uib.no
                                                     Anders Mørch
                                                      InterMedia
                                                University of Oslo
                                          anders.morch@intermedia.uio.no
ABSTRACT
We have analyzed data from a field study in collaborative telelearning (Wasson, 1999). The goal of the study was to
investigate how the students used a set of groupware tools to coordinate learning activities. We have used concepts from
collaborative telelearning and coordination mechanisms (Schmidt & Simone, 1996) as analytic framework. Our findings
indicate  that students  coordinate many  activities by implicit,   locally adopted    resources instead    of fully developed
mechanisms. Three implicit resources were identified and named (no initial discussion, asymmetry of knowledge, and
different expectations). These  resources were not   associated  with any   specific   groupware features,  but referred to the
students' background knowledge and subjective interpretation. We end the paper by suggesting how implicit resources in
distributed learning environments can play a role similar to how non-verbal cues ­ such as gesture and facial expression ­
play a role in face-to-face interaction, but without imitating human body language.

Keywords
Collaborative telelearning, distributed collaboration, coordination, explicit resources, implicit resources

DISTRIBUTED LEARNING AND COORDINATION
We have studied a distributed collaborative scenario over a period of four weeks. The participants were students enrolled at
three educational institutions in Norway. They were assigned three activities requiring collaboration. A groupware system
was used to mediate the interaction. The central research question we have asked is how the students coordinated their
activities with the groupware facilities they had available.
Coordination can broadly be defined as how to support, manage, and justify collaborative interaction. Coordination has also
been defined as "articulation work" (Strauss, 1985): the organization of work that accompanies work (contacting people,
scheduling meetings, division of labor, etc.) to ensure the latter's successful completion. We have identified three main
strands of research of relevance to collaboration systems: 1) Executable coordination mechanisms (e.g. Dourish & Bellotti,
1992), 2) Articulated coordination mechanism (e.g. Schmidt & Simone, 1996), 3) Coordination theories (e.g. Malone &
Crowston, 1992, Wasson, 1999). The notion of coordination mechanism we use in this paper is adapted from articulated
coordination mechanism (Schmidt & Simone, 1996), with some added modifications. Our focus has been to identify the
shared artifacts and articulation work  the students  have    used to coordinate their   activities. We  take   a socio-cultural
perspective in our analysis and have studied the scenario from different views (Wertsch, del Río & Alvarez, 1995). The
most important technique was observation of the students as they worked. This was augmented with more traditional HCI-
oriented usability studies, such as data logging and user satisfaction questionnaires.

FINDINGS
Our findings pertain to coordination at the tool use level and are summarized as follows. There were no prior agreement or
discussion among the students for how to use the different tools before they started on the assignment. This would often
lead to unanticipated situations. Most notably the students would use different tools to accomplish the same task. When
there were no procedures for how to use the tools and none had been developed by the students nor suggested by us, the use
of tools depended upon students' prior skills and new ideas for how the tools could be used. When interaction between
students required several rounds of turn taking the expectation for what constituted a complete action sequence would often
be interpreted differently.
Our findings are different from past work on coordination mechanisms by revealing personal choice and style as key factor
in coordination rather than procedures and mechanisms. The styles were easily amenable to local interpretation and mutual
adaptation. They were not built into the groupware, but dynamically "built" by the students during interaction with each
other. That is why we call them implicit resources to stress their informal and subjective characteristic.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 659

DISCUSSION
We argue in the full paper that implicit resources should be seen as the "virtual equivalent" of body language since body
language  (facial expression, body position, gesturing, etc.) and our     implicit resources are associated    with informal,
situation-specific cues people indirectly use and take for granted in collaborative interaction (i.e., a kind of tacit knowing).
These resources provide an important awareness of other people's activities and their level of participation.

IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN
We propose an approach to system design - inspired by Polanyi (1958) and his concept of peripheral awareness, which is
different from past work on coordination and awareness (e.g. Dourish & Bellotti, 1992). Instead of imitating body language
in support of computational awareness (e.g. multiple cursors, different views, interaction histories, etc.), we use it through
analogy. Our findings indicate that collaborative telelearning can be more efficient if more attention is paid to informing the
participants about affordances and constraints of coordination and collaboration. This can be achieved by a technique we
have dubbed "conceptual awareness on demand". A conceptual level adds a new dimension to collaborative telelearning
and exploits the distributed nature of this form of interaction. By bringing generally useful information about coordination
and collaboration to the users' attention in ways that are different from face-to-face situations we go "beyond being there"
(Hollan & Stornetta, 1992).
The current activity in the DoCTA project (DoCTA NSS) includes designing, developing, and field-testing a "pedagogical
agent" system that will instantiate these principles and provide for this kind of peripheral awareness. In this phase we reuse
ideas developed by others in the areas of software agents for collaborative applications, including the work on knowledge-
based critics (Fischer et al. 1991) and coaches (Suthers & Weiner, 1995).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the other member of the DoCTA project at the University of Bergen (Barbara Wasson,
Eskil Andreassen, Frode Guribye, Hege Higraff, Øyvind Meistad, Trond Pedersen, Kurt Rysjedal, Helge Underhaug, and Jo
Wake). We thank Weiqin Chen and Sten Ludvigsen for comments on an earlier draft. We are grateful for funding from the
ITU (IT in Education) program of KUF (the Norwegian Ministry of Church affairs, Education, and Research).

REFERENCES
Dourish, P. and Bellotti, V. (1992). Awareness and Coordination in Shared Workspaces. Proceedings of CSCW'92. ACM
         Press, pp. 107-114.
Fischer, G., Lemke, A.C., Mastaglio, T. and Mørch, A.I. (1991). The Role of Critiquing in Cooperative Problem Solving.
         ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 123-151.
Hollan, J. and Stornetta, S. (1992). Beyond Being There, in R.M. Baecker (ed.), Readings in Groupware and Computer-
         Supported Cooperative Work, Morgan Kaufman, 842-848.
Malone, T.W. and Crowston, K. What is Coordination Theory and How Can It Help Design Cooperative Work Systems?
         Proceedings of CSCW'90. ACM Press, pp. 357-370.
Polanyi, M. (1958). Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy. The University of Chicago Press.
Schmidt, K. and Simone, C. (1996). Coordination Mechanisms: Towards a Conceptual Foundation of CSCW Systems
         Design. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 5(2-3), pp. 155-200.
Strauss, A. (1985). Work and the Division of Labor. The Sociological Quarterly, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 1-19.
Suthers. D.  and  Weiner, A.  (1995). Groupware  for Developing   Critical   Discussion  Skills. Proceedings    of  the  ACM
         Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wasson,   B. (1999).  Design  and  Evaluation of a Collaborative   Telelearning     Activity Aimed   at Teacher     Training.
         Proceedings of CSCL'99. ACM Press, pp. 659-666.
Wertsch, J. V., del Río, P. & Alvarez, A. (1995). Sociocultural studies: history, action and mediation,. In J. V. Wertsch, P.
         del Río & A. Alvarez. (Eds.) Sociocultural Studies of Mind, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.1-34.
