Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page 660

Design Reviews with Remote Critics in an Asynchronous
                                                 Environment
                                                    Colleen M. Kehoe
                                     GVU Center/Georgia Institute of Technology
                                                 colleen@cc.gatech.edu
Keywords
Design, jury review, critics, collaborative website, asynchronous

INTRODUCTION
A familiar activity to students of    design is the design  review     ­ where  students   present their work-to-date   to receive
feedback and guidance from others. They take place throughout the term, providing students with multiple opportunities to
present and develop their ideas (Schön, 1987). At Georgia Tech, we have been exploring how simple technologies can be
used to increase opportunities for dialog in the design studio by expanding the range of topics, ways of participating, and
set of participants in that dialog. One thread of this research deals with using remote critics in design reviews. Using
technology, remote critics are able to view students' work and comment on it without traveling to the studio. In addition to
solving some logistical problems of bringing visitors to the studio (e.g. scheduling, expense), we speculated that allowing
remote critics to participate in design reviews had the potential to not only expand the set of participants in the dialog, but
to change it in fundamental ways.
This paper documents the design and development of one activity called Student-Curated Galleries. In this activity, groups
of students in a freshman studio in the College of Architecture used the web to present their work to remote critics who left
comments for each of them. It was implemented using a technology called a Collaborative Website or CoWeb. A CoWeb
looks and acts like any other website with one important exception: anyone can add new pages to the site or edit the pages
which are already there using a standard web browser. (For details of the CoWeb and its uses, see (Collaborative Software
Lab, 2000)).

DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
The Student-Curated Galleries activity was strongly influenced by our previous experience using remote critics in the
original CoOL Studio project, which took place the previous year (Zimring et al., in press). CoOL Studio demonstrated that
students and remote critics could interact successfully using the CoWeb. Students were able to represent their projects
sufficiently so that they could be understood and commented on by the critics. Equally important, critics were able to
participate with virtually no instruction and using only standard browser software. Even with these successes, CoOL Studio
provided many lessons for future reviews with remote critics (for specifics, see (Zimring, et al., in press)).
One of the ideas inspired by CoOL Studio was that rather than showing each student's work individually, as is usually the
case in  design reviews, students    would group  their work  into     thematic galleries. In  these galleries students would  be
responsible for "curating" them ­ for deciding on a theme, selecting images that explore that theme and writing about them.
The pedagogical goal was for students to reconceive their designs in terms of the themes and how they related to the other
projects in the gallery. Simultaneously, they would have to take into account the strengths and limitations of an online
presentation and decide how to convey their ideas clearly to the critics. One instructor agreed to try the activity in her studio
and so the research team worked with her over several months to develop the details. The final design for the galleries is
shown in Figure 1.
Major design decisions about the online environment and the review activity included:
·    The galleries would have a uniform format, designed by the research team and instructor, which students would have to
     work within. This decision was made to make the activity more manageable for students, and at the same time allow us
     to create a fairly sophisticated presentation for the galleries.
·    The gallery format  was designed    to  strictly limit the number     and  sizes of   the images  to  keep  download    times
     reasonable for critics. Students were also instructed on how to change the compression and resolution of their images
     to make the file sizes smaller.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page 661

                                                             ·   Several projects, related by a common theme, were
                                                                 displayed simultaneously on a single page. The goal
                                                                 was to allow critics to compare projects side-by-side,
                                                                 so instead of using a long, scrolling page, we used a
                                                                 "fish-eye" (Furnas, 1986) scheme for laying out each
                                                                 gallery.  Students'   images   are shown   in thumbnail
                                                                 and the critic can click on one of the thumbnails to
                                                                 bring  it into  focus. When    an  image  is in focus, a
                                                                 larger    version  of   it  is  displayed    along  with
                                                                 accompanying text that the student has written.
                                                             ·   There was a single comment space for each gallery.
                                                                 Within    it, critics  could   comment   on   a specific
                                                                 project, compare projects, or comment on the gallery
                                                                 and theme as a whole. Using a single comment space
                                                                 meant that critics could easily read what other critics
                                                                 had written. We also hoped that it would encourage
  Figure 1. Detail of one gallery with an image fromProject2infocus(right).Texttotherightofthestudents to read the comments for the whole gallery,not just those related to their project.
  image    is from  the student;  text below   is from the
  critics.
·   To make the creation of images more manageable, students worked on small format paper that could be scanned in a
    single    pass. Arrangements   were   also made   to use a digital camera    to photograph   their three-dimensional  models,
    eliminating the intermediate steps of developing and scanning regular photos.
·   Because the project was only six weeks long, on-line reviews were scheduled to replace, rather than duplicate or
    supplement in-person reviews. Two on-line reviews were scheduled, alternating weeks with in-person reviews.
·   Students would spend about three days preparing their on-line presentations from the drawings and models they had
    previously created. Critics were given a five-day window in which to visit the galleries and leave their comments. The
    aim was to allow critics a reasonable amount of time to participate, but to make the window small enough that the
    comments would still be relevant to the students' projects.
·   Critics were provided with background information and an explanation of the exercises the class had done via email
    before the review. This information was also included in the gallery along with an explanation of the 2CoOL project,
    brief instructions for using the CoWeb, and a "Sign-in" page for each critic where he or she could introduce themselves
    and practice using the CoWeb.

CONCLUSION
The design of the Student-Curated Galleries activity addressed many of the problems discovered in our previous use of
remote critics, but it was not without its own set of difficulties. Many of these related not to the specific technology but how
the activity changed by going from a familiar, face-to-face activity to a novel, asynchronous, computer-mediated one. A
discussion of how this activity was different from a typical design review for the participants and how this impacted the
outcome of the activity is available in the online version of this paper.

REFERENCES
Collaborative Software Lab (2000) A Catalog of CoWeb Uses. GVU Tech Report 00-19. Georgia Institute of Technology,
           Atlanta, GA. (ftp://ftp.cc.gatech.edu/pub/gvu/tr/2000/00-19.pdf)
Furnas, G.W. (1986) Generalized fisheye views. Proceedings of ACM CHI'86 (Boston, MA, April 1986), 16-23.
Schön, D. A. (1987) Educating the Reflective Practitioner. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, CA.
Zimring, C., Khan, S., Craig, D., ul-Haq, S., Guzdial, M. (in press) CoOL Studio: Using Simple Tools to Expand the
           Discursive Space of the Design Studio, Automation in Construction.
