Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page   664

      Teacher Candidate Perceptions of Telementoring in
                                          Knowledge Forum
                                                     Jim Hewitt
                                            OISE / University of Toronto
                                             jhewitt@oise.utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
The success of traditional email-based telementoring rests on the ability and inclination of students to maintain open
channels of communication with mentors. Telementoring in learning environments (specifically, Knowledge Forum) may
offer strategic advantages by  making   the day-to-day  evolution of   student investigations  more  accessible. This   paper
describes an experiment in which University of Toronto teacher candidates worked as Knowledge Forum telementors in
four  elementary  school classrooms.   Research findings support  the  notion  that Knowledge    Forum    provides   valuable
contextual information   for mentors.  Additionally, teacher   candidates reported     that they found    the experience  of
electronically mentoring a Knowledge Forum class to be professionally valuable.

Keywords
Telementoring, pre-service education, computer-mediated communication, learning environments

INTRODUCTION
The rapid growth of the Internet offers exciting new possibilities for classroom learning. In recent years, it has become
increasingly feasible to use email  to forge electronic mentoring,  or  telementoring  relationships between    students and
subject-matter experts outside the schools. To date, telementoring experiments have focused almost exclusively on the use
of email as a communications medium (e.g., Harris & Jones, 1999; O'Neill & Gomez, 1998). The current research breaks
with this tradition and investigates the possibility of situating telementoring discourse within the context of a computer-
based learning environment.
The full potential of telementoring has yet to be realized. Research suggests that traditional mentor-mentee models require
careful preparation and ongoing monitoring to prevent failure. For example, in a study by Harris and Jones (1999), over
one-third of the telementoring relationships were abandoned prematurely. Breakdowns such as these are commonplace, and
perhaps understandable.  The  success  of telementoring  rests heavily on the  ability and   inclination of students to  keep
mentors informed about their goals, their discoveries, and the challenges they are facing. Some students have difficulties in
this regard. It is an unfortunate reality that those learners who could most deeply benefit from a mentoring relationship are
often the ones that have the most trouble carrying out and sustaining a productive series of email exchanges.
In conventional telementoring arrangements, students spend part of their time investigating a particular problem, and part of
their time exchanging email with mentors. This system is inherently inefficient because it divides the students' attention.
One way to bring these two worlds together is through the use of collaborative learning environments. Tools like Covis
(Edelson, Pea, & Gomez, 1996), Virtual University (Harasim, 1993) and Knowledge Forum (Bereiter, in press) allow
students to work together in an electronic learning community. Within Knowledge Forum, for example, learners define
research problems and then assist each other by contributing theories, discoveries, questions, and information to the on-line
database. Providing telementors with electronic access to a Knowledge Forum database would enable them to follow, in
detail, the evolution of student investigations. This would provide mentors with a deeper sense of the students' work than
they would likely acquire through email exchanges alone. At the same time, it would reduce the need for students to keep
mentors constantly apprised of developments. Students would instead conduct their investigations in their on-line learning
environment, while mentors observe remotely and offer assistance as necessary.

METHOD
This study explores the advantages and limitations of mentoring through Knowledge Forum. Seven teacher candidates from
the one-year University of Toronto teacher education program served as mentors. After a brief telementoring preparation
program, these individuals worked over the Internet in the Knowledge Forum databases of a nearby elementary school. The
teacher candidates were divided among four classrooms: grade 1, grade 3, grade 4 and grade 5-6. The goals of the research
were to: a) determine the degree to which teacher candidates could glean, through their virtual visitations, an understanding
of student-led Knowledge Forum investigations; b) identify difficulties experienced by the teacher candidates during their
online interactions; and c) explore teacher candidates' perceptions regarding the educational efficacy of telementoring as a
professional development activity.
The data consist of teacher candidate interviews, written teacher candidate reports, two videotaped conversations between
teachers and teacher candidates (lasting approximately an hour each), researcher field notes, and records of online mentor-
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page  665

mentee exchanges. Two parties identified reoccurring themes in the transcripts: the author of this paper and by a researcher
who was not previously part of the telementoring experiment.

FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
The interview data and written reports indicate that telementors had few difficulties following Knowledge Forum discourse
and analyzing the progress that students were making in their investigations. The Knowledge Forum databases provided
mentors    with an  extensive corpus   of  student  work. In    fact, mentors reported     that there was  sometimes    too   much
information.   Since the  teacher candidates    began  mentoring  in  the middle of   a  unit,  they  were initially faced  with a
significant number of notes to read. As one mentor remarked, "I must admit that I was overwhelmed by the vast `web of
knowledge' that the students had created online."
The telementoring experience appeared to benefit the mentors as much, and possibly even more, than the mentees. All
teacher candidates were impressed by the degree of agency that students were afforded in their investigations. They felt that
their Knowledge Forum activities were much more student-centered than anything they had witnessed during their practice
teaching sessions. One remarked:
"I am starting to understand that... the acquisition of rote knowledge is secondary to the development of theories and the
ability to test theories and ask the right questions of other people's theories.... I must <as a teacher> create an atmosphere
that allows students to take risks and not be afraid of making mistakes"
Some    of the  responses from    teacher  candidates  suggest  that  the telementoring    experience   may  have    affected their
pedagogical beliefs. One teacher candidate claimed that the experience changed the way that she interacts with her own
children.
"<My> dialogue with my own two daughters <aged 8 and 9> changed as a result of this exposure.... We have adopted an
open-forum type of attitude at home where questions, theories, ideas, opinion whether right or wrong are welcome in
discussions..."
The research also uncovered two problems. First, the teacher candidates were accustomed to structured, teacher-centered
pedagogies,   and  were  unsure  how   to  best support students in   Knowledge  Forum.     This  points to a need   for effective
telementoring models and more extensive mentor training. Second, teacher candidate messages sometimes closed down
student  discourse.  The  reason  for this is unclear.  Further research  is required   to determine   why  mentor   contributions
sometimes cause threads to end abruptly, and to explore possible ways of rectifying the problem.
If the approaches employed by this research can indeed transform teacher candidate beliefs about thinking and learning,
then there may be potential for making telementoring a more central part of a teacher education program. Since Knowledge
Forum preserves a record of interaction, mentor-mentee discourse could theoretically be extracted and made a subject of
analysis in pre-service classes. This would provide pre-service programs with tremendous opportunities to link educational
practice to educational theory.

REFERENCES
Bereiter, C. (in press). Education and Mind in the Knowledge Age.
Edelson, D., Pea, R., & Gomez, L. (1996). Constructivism in the collaboratory. In B. G. Wilson (Ed.), Constructivist
          learning environments: Case studies in instructional design, (pp. 151-164). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational
          Technology Publications.
Harasim, L. (1993). Collaborative in cyberspace: Using computer conferences as a group learning environment. Interactive
          Learning Environments, 3(2), 119-130.
Harris, J. B.,  &  Jones, G.  (1999).  A   descriptive  study of telementoring   among     students,  subject-matter experts,  and
          teachers: Message flow and function patterns. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 32, 36-53.
O'Neill,   D. K.,  & Gomez,   L.  M.   (1998).   Sustaining   mentoring   relationships on-line.  Paper  presented   at the   ACM
          Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, Seattle, WA.
