Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  673

                                                  Think.com
                                                      Sheila Hunter
                       Oracle Corporation, Redwood Shores, California, United States
                                              Sheila.Hunter@Oracle.com
ABSTRACT
Think.com is a free, web-based environment for primary through secondary students and educators. Think.com supports
online learning communities with the tools and space to create and share their work online. Both students and teachers have
the ability to easily create, communicate     and collaborate    with their peers in an online  environment.  Integration of
Think.com into the curriculum provides students an exciting new venue for learning, and facilitates global communication
and collaboration within a learning community.

Keywords
Create, Communicate, Collaborate, K12, Online Learning Community

INTRODUCTION
Think.com is a unique tool that allows educators to participate in a collaborative learning community for primary and
secondary education. It is currently available in the United States and the United Kingdom, with pilots in New Zealand and
Chile. Learn more about Think.com during our two CSCL sessions and in the Collaboratorium.

CLASSROOM USAGE
The following two examples show two ways that educators may use Think.com to increase the learning opportunities
offered to their pupils. Both examples are from the United Kingdom because Think.com was initially piloted there and
hence has the longest observed usage in Britain.

Think.com Facilitates International Collaboration
The WebPlay project gives children the chance to interact with peers across the world, broadening their standard classroom
learning. Think.com gives the children simple Internet tools to create their plays in a safe environment over the web.
Through this collaborative project, schools write and produce a play across the Internet. The project brings primary school
children from the UK and the USA together. Five schools in South London and 110 pupils from Los Angeles are writing
and producing   plays that will be  shown    over the  Internet. The  tools within Think.com   allow children to  effectively
collaborate on the project. With its brainstorms, debating and email facilities, Think.com provides a unique platform for the
WebPlay project. When the plays are finished they will be shown using the Internet so the children can see the results of the
project.
The Merton Education Business Partnership and Southwark Education Business Alliance in the UK, along with the Los
Angeles Unified School District in United States, developed WebPlay. Actors and staff from Polka Theatre for Children
also joined the project, and will assist with script writing and provide workshops to the pupils and teachers taking part.
Polka will also perform a play specially written for WebPlay entitled "Moon Shadow", to UK children involved in the
project, then travel to the USA on 16th March to perform and coach the children in America. Using the Internet the children
are able to exchange notes, review the play and also exchange ideas for their own productions.

Think.com Motivates Disaffected Students
Fiona Garrett of Boston Spa School was awarded a DfEE (Department for Education and Employment) Best Practice
Research Scholarship this year. Below, she shares her research of the use of Think.com with disaffected children.
"My research project focuses on a group of students who are categorized in school as `disaffected' and part of my role is to
teach English to these students who are following a year eleven `alternative curriculum'. My research project combines
Think.com and this particular group of students. The question I chose to examine was: "Can the use of Think.com and
consequently   membership  of   an online    community  alter/improve   the learning outcomes   of a group of  `disaffected'
students?"
A profile of the students is integral to this project. All students were in year 11 and had been classified as `disaffected'.
They had been identified towards the end of year 10 as either very disruptive, poor attendees, or consistently failing in most
areas of the curriculum and consequently `switched off'. This group of students was enrolled in an alternative year 11
course with the following objectives: to withdraw students from main stream; provide them with the opportunity to do a
combination  of work   experience, college    courses and continue  studying  core subjects but in small groups   with work
differentiated to meet their specific needs.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page 674

My hypothesis was that the students in this group were poorly motivated towards work. They had displayed this lack of
motivation by rejecting their entitlement to the national curriculum in one way or another and consequently earning a place
in the group. Thus in order to improve motivation and encourage the students to use a variety of skills, they had to be
exposed to something that would provide a catalyst to motivation. I considered Think.com to be a system designed to offer
something suitably new and interesting resulting in a positive change in motivation and work ethic.
The research is primarily ethnographic supported by in-depth qualitative interviews and some analysis of written work
completed before and after exposure to Think.com. I have come to a range of conclusions:
        The ability to interact freely with other members of the community offers important learning gains.
        The natural differentiation that the technology allows is ideal for a group of this kind.
        The girls seemed more interested initially in the idea of a `global' audience for their ideas.
        Think.com gives the students the ability to construct an identity through word. This is interesting for a student who
         has avoided using words for many years.
        Feedback from the virtual audience has a very important impact on the students' view of their own page and
         motivation towards the project.
        The lack of pressure on the students to produce an assessed piece of work gave them the freedom to control the
         content rather than have it dictated to them.
        Most students need to see the potential of the site the first time they look at it in order to feel inspired.
        Students need to recognize that they control the content, and there are consequences for inclusion of inappropriate
         content.
        With a group of `disaffected' students, relationship with the teacher is of critical importance.
Essentially the impact of Think.com  has   been  a     change  in motivation. Learning how   to    use  the system      and taking
ownership of their own pages meant students who would normally have to be forced to work in class or who refuse to do
anything perceived as work became independent learners. They accessed their sites in their own time and made use of the
system without me prompting them to log on. Both confidence and motivation have massive educational benefits. Students
who engaged with Think.com learnt a variety of new skills, not least how to set up their own page, but also communication
skills, writing skills, layout and organizational skills. Think.com provides a new audience for students who don't trust the
audience in school. They are able to construct a new identity and receive genuine feedback from people who don't know
their reputation or usual behavior. There are no expectations.
Think.com offers a working space that instantly 'looks good'. Many of these students are used to very poor work in terms of
style and  quality and don't want to produce   output     as  they know  their work  will be difficult    to read,      messy  and
embarrassing. Think.com offers a very coherent, well-organized space that they can be instantly proud of. Think.com gives
them 'space'. Think.com offers a certain level of instant outcomes for the student. It doesn't take long to have something
tangible on your page. This speed is important to students who give up very quickly if they can't see an outcome. They are
not restricted to constructing 'teacher friendly' work. They can use their space to show something about themselves. It
allows them to work independently and not have the teacher breathing down their neck. A lot of these students have not
worked in school for many years. It puts a lot of pressure on them when they do have to work and they react badly to being
watched.
It has been an interesting project with a wide range of conclusions and applications for future work with similar disaffected
students."

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Think.com team thanks WebPlay and Fiona Garrett of Boston Spa School in England.
