Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  677

        Multicultural Issues in the Design, Evaluation and
                      Dissemination of CSCL Systems
                                               Masanori Sugimoto
                                           University of Tokyo, Japan
                                           sugi@r.dl.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                                               Daniel D. Suthers
                                     University of Hawai'i at Manoa, USA
                                               suthers@hawaii.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper describes an overview of a panel that will be held as an interactive event in CSCL2002. Multicultural issues in
design, evaluations and dissemination of CSCL systems are discussed. Four outstanding panelists will share their rich
experiences, and propose how multicultural issues should be considered and examined in the context of system design and
development and practice in school education, what problems should be dealt with, and how information technologies can
contribute to promoting multicultural learning. Discussions are not limited to the panelists: active participation from the
audience will be welcomed.

Keywords
Learning in multicultural situations, collaborative learning, information technologies

INTRODUCTION
This paper describes an overview of an interactive penal to be held at CSCL2002. Multicultural issues are critical in today's
internationalized and networked society, and should be deeply considered in CSCL research since one of the theoretical
backgrounds of CSCL is mutual learning among people of different knowledge and backgrounds. Heterogeneity can be an
opportunity for promoting collaborative learning, and CSCL systems should support people in overcoming their cultural
differences and establishing mutual understanding.
Recent development of information technologies (Internet, WWW etc.) seems to give us ideal opportunities for applying
CSCL in multicultural situations. However, it is not easy in practice. We face some serious problems, such as the "digital
divide" comprised of disparities in access not only   to computers, but  also to well-trained  teachers and    useful digital
resources. Another problem is how to construct mutual respect among people of different cultures and communities. For
successful mutual learning, a critical precondition is to recognize differences among individuals, allow them to equally
participate in a learning situation, and construct mutual understanding through interacting with each other.
We believe that emerging technologies should be useful tools for dealing with multicultural issues in CSCL. Therefore, we
need to investigate (1) how we should use technologies to enhance mutual learning in multicultural situations, (2) what
kinds of learning resources are necessary for establishing mutual respect, (3) whether we can create models of collaborative
processes among different communities/cultures, and (4) how computational systems can play a role in supporting these
processes.

ORGANIZATION OF THE PANEL
In this panel, four panelists who have been actively working in their own fields will discuss multicultural issues for design,
evaluations and dissemination of CSCL systems through their rich experiences and perspectives. The panelists will show
several interesting findings. One example is that cultural identities of individuals make them aware of their own uniqueness
and differences, and this enhances mutual respect of different cultures. This example gives us a hint for content design of
multicultural CSCL systems. Another example is that different communities and generations should not have excessive
expectations of each other at the beginning of collaboration processes, but should work to establish expectations. The
panelists have so far put their ideas into practice in various situations such as primary schools, local communities, and
office environments. Based on these realistic and well-grounded experiences as well as those of audience members who
have engaged in CSCL/multicultural activities, we will share lessons learned, and explore new possibilities and approaches
for design, evaluation and dissemination of multicultural CSCL systems.
Each panelist will talk about their activities and demonstrate their own system in an interactive manner. Each presentation
will be followed by a discussion period. As this panel is one of the interactive events, active participation from the audience
will be welcomed.
The panelists have different backgrounds, cultures and knowledge. Their approaches and objectives are not the same.
Therefore, multicultural issues will be investigated from different perspectives in this panel. Experiences shown by the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page  678

panelists will make discussions realistic and well grounded. Through interactive demos and audience participation, active
discussions and mutual understanding not only among panelists but also the audience will be pursued.
The panel will be beneficial for people who are interested in human-computer interaction, computer supported collaborative
learning, computer supported cooperative work, and multicultural education. Topics discussed will range from system
design and evaluations to practice in real settings, so researchers, system developers, business persons, and school teachers
will be able to participate from their own standpoints.

BIOGRAPHIES OF THE PANELISTS (ALPHABETICAL ORDER)
Ms. Bonnie Bracey is a Lucas Fellow, and was a member of the National Information Infrastructure Advisory Council
appointed by President Clinton working with Vice President Gore and the Department of Commerce in helping to frame the
documents  that provided   the national visions for     the use  of technology. She is an outspoken  advocate  for teacher
involvement in the exploration and visioning of the use of technology as a tool. She has been helping teachers all over the
world in national and global outreach on special initiatives. She has been working on issues of digital equity, digital divide,
and digital bridges that are inclusive of multicultural issues. She won the Top25 Women on the Net 2001.
Dr. Amy S. Bruckman is an assistant professor at college of computing, Georgia Institute of Technology. Her work is
generally on constructionist learning online. In one of her projects "Palaver Tree Online", kids interview elders to learn
about history from people who have lived it (for example, learning about civil rights from older African-Americans).
Through several pilot studies, she found some interesting themes: how to find ethnic diversity online, differences between
elders' perspectives and   teachers' expectations, and      so forth. They  are key themes  for designing  and evaluating
multicultural CSCL systems.
Dr. Shigeru Miyagawa is a professor in the Department of Linguistics and Philosophy and also in the Department of
Foreign Languages and Literatures, both at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He has been working for "Star
Festival", a learning support system about the quest for one's identity in a multi-ethnic and multi-cultural society. This
system is now used in elementary schools in Boston and Hawai`i, and other school districts are considering adoption, in
order to encourage young people to explore their own cultural identity while learning about Japanese culture and history.
His works are not only related to design and evaluation issues of multicultural learning support systems, but also strategies
for their dissemination.
Dr. Kumiyo Nakakoji is an associate professor at Graduate School of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Japan, and a senior researcher at a Japanese software industry. One of the key ideas of her work is "Three C's
(Culture, Communication and Creativity)", as applied to software development, multimedia authoring, and design. She has
especially been interested in open source software development processes and collective creativity: how computational
systems support interaction with people of different backgrounds, bridging between communities of different cultures and
promoting mutual understanding.
