Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                        page     681

           C. NEW MEDIA

  Supporting Collaborative Design by Communities of
          Interest with the Envisionment and Discovery
                                   Collaboratory (EDC)
  Ernesto Arias, Hal Eden, Vanessa Empinotti, Gerhard Fischer, Andrew Gorman, Shin'ichi
                                                  Konomi, Eric Scharff
                                   Center for LifeLong Learning & Design
                          College of Architecture and Planning (Arias, Empinotti)
                                                  University of Colorado
ABSTRACT
A major role of new media is not to deliver predigested information to individuals, but to provide the opportunity and
resources for social debate, discussion, and the creation of new knowledge. In collaborative design, the knowledge to
understand, frame, and resolve problems does not exist, but is constructed and evolved during the process, exploiting the
power of "symmetry of ignorance" and "breakdowns." From this perspective, access to existing information and knowledge
(often seen as the major advance of new media) is a very limiting concept.

To illustrate this theoretical approach towards collaborative learning, the participants in this interactive event will engage in
collaborative design activities supported by the Envisionment and Discovery Collaboratory (EDC). The EDC merges
physical interaction, handheld devices, simulations, end-user modifiability, and evolving web spaces to support a) the
integration of problem framing and problem solving, b) the creation of shared understanding articulated as externalizations,
and c) computer-supported learning among stakeholders.

We will design the interactive event such that the participants will form a community of interest (defined by their collective
concern with the resolution of a design problem) as they take on the roles of stakeholders from various communities of
practice (such as city planners, transportation    designers, and citizens). The event will illustrate the possibilities and
limitations of the EDC for providing unique and innovative computer support for collaborative learning.

OBJECTIVE
Participants in this interactive experience will
   Learn about the challenges and opportunities faced by participants in collaborative design settings;
   Develop a deeper understanding of the nature of wicked design problems;
   Work with some of the technologies being developed to support collaboration and participation at L3D;
   Experience the strengths and weaknesses of our approaches;
   Bring back insights from their participation to the overall conference discourse; and
   Have an opportunity to participate in our research by providing us with feedback.

DESCRIPTION
The EDC [Arias et al., 1999; Arias et al., 2000] is a unique, immersive environment that provides stakeholders new
opportunities to engage in active knowledge construction supported by new techniques in human-computer interaction..
The EDC uses:
   physical interaction (using SmartBoard touch screens and PitA-Board [Eden, 2002] interfaces)
   handheld wireless devices (PDAs, QueryLens(1)),

(1) http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~L3D/clever/projects/querylens.html
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                               page  682

    simulations providing for end-user modifiability (built in substrates such as AgentSheets and Squeak), and
    evolving web spaces (using DynaSites, LivingBook, and SPIDER) utilizing open source principles [Scharff, 2002].

This proposed interactive experience will engage all participants in playing the roles of various stakeholders (representing
members of different communities who come together in a community of interest), using the EDC to explore, frame, and
attempt to reach a resolution in the context of the following problem scenario.
         Colorado's rich history of mining has provided     a colorful flavor to the development of the state, along with a legacy of environmental
         problems. The EPA has targeted mine sites near the towns of Vanessaville, Sharffeton, and Edensburg for cleanup. In working with residents to
         develop a viable approach to the environmental reclamation that is needed. However, they must address resident fears of increased tax burdens,
         the stigma that can accompany "Superfund" designation, potential depression of property values, and skepticism regarding the severity of the
         problems and their impacts. The perceptions of residents vary greatly depending upon their location (upstream, downstream, distance from
         watershed features)
         The planners face a difficult challenge in bringing together members of the community in a way that promotes civic discourse leading to a
         resolution of the challenges that are faced.

The  participants   will work    together  to  resolve      this community       problem  by constructing       and  modifying     neighborhood
model--placing and moving physical objects that represent objects such as houses, parks, schools, and bus stops. In doing
so, they will engage in collaborative knowledge construction, creation of boundary objects for shared understanding, end-
user modifiability of computational environments, and engage in innovative processes to construct new content.

We will conclude this interactive event with session at the conference site on Friday, in which the participants' experience
with our interactive event can be brought back into the overall conference discourse. We will show videotape portions of
the EDC   interactive    event   to playback   for      the session    attendees  who   did participate   in    the  experience    to ground  the
discussion, and will ask those who did participate to form an informal discussion panel on the challenges for learning and
participation that the EDC is working to address.

REFERENCES
Arias, E. G., Eden,      H., Fischer,  G.,  Gorman,         A.,  & Scharff,    E.  (1999) "Beyond       Access:   Informed    Participation  and
        Empowerment," Proceedings of the Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL '99) Conference, pp. 20-
        32.
Arias, E. G., Eden, H., Fischer, G., Gorman, A., & Scharff, E. (2000) "Transcending the Individual Human Mind--Creating
        Shared Understanding through Collaborative Design," ACM Transactions on Computer Human-Interaction, 7(1),
        pp. 84-113.
Eden,  H. (2002)    "Getting   in   on the (Inter)Action:        Exploring    Affordances   for   Collaborative      Learning  in  a  Context of
        Informed Participation," In Proceedings of CSCL '02 Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Work.
Scharff, E. D. (2002) "Applying Open Source Principles to Collaborative Learning Environments," In Proceedings of
        CSCL '01 Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, pp. (elsewhere in this publication).
