Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                page   687

    C-VISions: Socialized Learning through Collaborative,
                                Virtual, Interactive Simulations
                                              Yam San Chee, Chit Meng Hooi
                              School of Computing, National University of Singapore
                                                  cheeys@comp.nus.edu.sg
ABSTRACT
Today's cheaper personal computers with improved computational power have made the technology of networked desktop
virtual  reality environments    accessible   to typical end   users, including  students. This paper    describes  C­VISions,   a
collaborative virtual environment developed to support interactive and collaborative learning using virtual simulations. The
research effort is grounded on the principles of active, experiential learning and constructivist/social constructivist ideas,
with their attendant commitment to group sense making, discourse-based learning, and community building processes. The
paper also provides an overview of the system's design and implementation. Finally, we explain the current status of the
research effort and articulate plans for future work.

Keywords
Networked    virtual environments,     desktop   virtual reality,  collaborative learning, interactive   simulations,  experiential
learning, constructivism

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Educators and educational technologists often harbor visions of how computing technology might be leveraged upon to
powerfully   engage   student    learning. In  practice, these   visions are  usually  tempered     by constraints related  to  the
computational    power of    the hardware     required and   the cost of technology.   Fortunately,  rapidly increasing  levels of
hardware   performance    accompanied      by falling  costs has  meant  that students today  have   ready access  to  much  more
powerful personal computers than in the recent past. This development provides an opportunity for educators to push the
technology envelope in pursuit of their vision.
One particular technology that is receiving greater attention in education is that of networked virtual environments (Singhal
& Zyda, 1999). Such environments make prominent use of two system technologies: virtual reality and networking. While
virtual reality (VR) technology has been available for many years, its application to the domain of education has been a
specialist field  limited to researchers   with  the  resources  to develop   fully immersive VR    applications.  The rise of  the
Internet, however, has given rise to a new genre of distributed environments for chatting and socialization that include a
desktop VR component, allowing users to share a three-dimensional (3D) virtual space. In this space, users are represented
as avatars. They can navigate within the 3D worlds and interact with other users as well as virtual objects in the worlds
albeit in fairly limited ways. Some of the most well-known systems of this type include Active Worlds, blaxxun, and
Community Place. Damer (1998) provides a comprehensive, albeit somewhat dated, review of such virtual environments.
The goal of the C­VISions project is to harness networked desktop virtual reality technology to create a powerful and
engaging collaborative environment for student learning. This technology was chosen because it is capable of supporting
several important learning objectives. These objectives include experiential learning, simulation-based learning, inquiry-
based learning, guided exploratory learning, collaborative learning, and socialized, community-based learning. The C­
VISions    environment    seeks  to foster these  kinds  of  learning in the  domain   of science   education, including physics,
chemistry, and biology. We have chosen to focus on the desktop variant of virtual reality because it is readily accessible
today. At the same time, it avoids the potential difficulty of motion sickness induced by the fully immersive virtual reality
variant.

RESEARCH BACKGROUND
As stated by Normand (1999), "the essence of collaborative virtual environments (CVEs) is the use of natural spatial
metaphors, together with the integration of participants and data within the same and common spatial frame of reference"
(p. 218). The most established, well-known, and successful research work involving VR for general education (as opposed
to medical education) can be traced to the Human Interface Technology (HIT) Lab at the University of Washington, Seattle,
and to   Project  ScienceSpace    at George    Mason   University.  Both  these  research  efforts, however,   are based on  fully
immersive VR that makes use of head-mounted displays and data gloves. At both locations, the technology has been
deployed mostly in a stand-alone, non-collaborative learning mode. A less well-known example of the use of educational
VR is Virtual Explorer from the University of California, San Diego, where the researchers have created an immersive,
highly interactive environment for learning human immunology (Dean et al., 2000).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 688

Findings from the HIT Lab suggest that students engaged in a virtual world learning environment found it fascinating and
enjoyable. They were highly motivated to learn the concepts and skills necessary to design and model objects, with their
associated behaviors, so that they could build their own virtual environments (Bricken & Byrne, 1993). A study by Winn et
al (1999) also suggests that building a virtual environment improved low-ability students' understanding of the virtual
environment content; however, it had no effect on high-ability students. Unlike the focus of allowing students to build their
own virtual environments adopted at the HIT Lab, much of the effort at Project ScienceSpace focuses on using immersive
VR to convey abstract scientific concepts and to aid complex conceptual learning (Salzman, Dede, Loftin, & Chen, 1999).
ScienceSpace   represents a  systematic   program    of research  that   deals with   physics.  Three multisensory    learning
environments have been created: NewtonWorld, dealing with Newton's laws and the laws of conservation, MaxwellWorld,
dealing with electrostatics, and PaulingWorld, dealing with molecular representations and quantum-molecular bonding.
These science learning environments are unique in that they were designed explicitly to allow students to "enter into" the
world of the phenomenon being studied, namely, the conservation of momentum, electric fields and potentials, and ionic
versus covalent bonding. In this regard, the researchers have employed the technology in a sophisticated manner to allow
students to experience phenomena that cannot otherwise be experienced in the real world.
Research that employs desktop VR for education and learning is more scattered and less established. One example is
DEVRL,   Distributed   Extensible   Virtual  Reality Laboratory,  a  joint research   project between  Lancaster   University,
Nottingham University, and University College London. The objective of this project, which has probably ended, was to
build a shared virtual physics laboratory. This work is not well reported. In contrast, a better publicized related research
effort that also involves the three mentioned British universities is the COVEN (COllaborative Virtual ENvironments)
project (Frécon, Smith, Steed, Stenius, & Ståhl, 2001; Normand, 1999). Unlike DEVRL, however, the COVEN research
effort has a technology focus and is not oriented to applications for learning. Like DEVRL, it makes use of the DIVE
toolkit as its development base.
Empirical evaluation of learning using desktop VR is still in its infancy. A weak example can be found in Mills & de
Araújo (1999). In this example, the researchers sought to compare a desktop VR group and a non-VR group on the
effectiveness of learning a management technique. They employed desktop VR in a stand-alone mode and hoped to exploit
visualization capabilities afforded by the technology. Their study found no statistically significant difference between the
two groups.  Viewed   critically, however,   the researchers made   poor use   of the technology, and  the study   was poorly
conceived and operationalized. It should be evident, therefore, that the field of desktop VR in education and learning
remains open and requires focused and systematic research.

TECHNOLOGY ASPECTS
When using desktop VR, the most prominent aspects of technology experienced are the 3D virtual world browser and the
interaction style for interacting  with  the system.  While  3D   representation  techniques  and difficulties are fairly well
understood from a computer science viewpoint, the design of an interaction style for 3D worlds still requires considerable
research. In general, there are three types of interaction task that need to be supported: navigation, selection/manipulation,
and system control (Bowman, Kruijff, LaViola, & Poupyrev, 2001). The design of an effective 3D interaction style will
depend greatly on the domain in which the technology is applied and on the kinds of task that must be supported.
The introduction of networking technology to desktop VR allows the virtual worlds to be shared. Many technical hurdles
must be overcome to implement a networked virtual environment successfully. Achievement of this goal, however, creates
an environment where users can experience a shared sense of space, a shared sense of presence, a shared sense of time, a
way to communicate, and a way to share objects and experiences (Singhal & Zyda, 1999).
There are other critical, but less apparent technology components at work in a networked virtual environment. A database is
needed to support the persistence of object states in virtual worlds. Implementation of the technology also raises difficult
issues relating to realtime, multi-user processing, the maintenance of world consistency across multiple client computers,
the handling of concurrent events, and the design of a system architecture that will readily support scaling to a large number
of concurrent users. In addition, the incorporation of audio communication and video streaming provide desirable, more
advanced features that require implementation of realtime media streaming.

PEDAGOGICAL BASIS
The design of C­VISions is rooted firmly on active, experiential learning (see, for example, Dewey, 1916/1980) and
constructivist/social constructivist principles (see, for example, Fosnot, 1996). Boethel and Dimock (1999) provide an
excellent critical review of how technology can be used to support knowledge construction. According to Doolittle (1999),
the basic epistemological tenets of constructivism are:
·   Knowledge is not passively accumulated; rather it is the result of active cognizing by the individual.
·   Cognition  is an  adaptive   process that functions to   make an individual's   behavior  more viable  given   a particular
    environment.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  689

·   Cognition organizes and makes sense of one's experience; it is not a process to render an accurate representation of
    reality.
·   Knowing has roots in both biological/neurological construction and social, cultural, and language based interactions.
In light of the above, the technology of VR is leveraged upon to instantiate active, experiential learning. We provide an
environment where students can engage in focused science inquiry by running simulations, asking "what if?" questions,
changing simulation parameters, and observing simulation outcomes. As Winn (1993) persuasively argues, immersive VR
technology is especially empowering for learning because it supports a direct, first-person experience of learning. This
argument holds true also for desktop VR environments despite a weakening of the multisensory dimension of experience.
Shared experiences that revolve around shared objects in a virtual world (for example, a rolling billiard ball or a streamed
video clip) create a natural and authentic context for a discourse-based learning community. The context motivates students
to articulate their ideas and understandings to one another, thus fostering an environment for peer-assisted learning and
reciprocal tutoring. In C­VISions, both text-based chat and audio-based chat are supported to support discourse-based
learning.
As researchers, we recognize the importance of helping students to make the transition from first-person, experiential
learning to third-person, symbolic learning. To this end, C­VISions includes a set of collaboration tools comprising a
shared electronic whiteboard and a shared mind-map editor. The shared whiteboard allows students to express and represent
their ideas in symbolic as well as graphical terms. We also recognize the need to support abstraction and critical reflection.
The shared mind-map editor serves this purpose. In addition, the C­VISions virtual world browser includes a visualization
tool that allows students to call up graph plots of interesting phenomena on demand. Our intention and hope is that the
supporting tool set will facilitate the needed transition from experience to mentation.
The Experiential Learning Cycle proposed by Kolb (1984) summarizes what we hope to achieve fairly well (see Figure 1).
Active experimentation yields concrete experience that provides the basis for reflective observation which eventually leads
to abstract  conceptualization, and the cycle iterates. In the process, students'       understandings are transformed both
extensionally and intensionally while comprehension is grounded in apprehension.

                                      Figure 1. Kolb's Experiential Learning Cycle
Other authors have also highlighted the special advantages that can accrue from using VR for learning. Foreman (1999)
values the sophisticated programmability of simulated objects and the simultaneous telepresence and collaboration of geo-
distributed learners. He draws attention to three important features. First, avatar worlds are suited to developing actionable
knowledge as opposed to knowledge for knowledge's sake. Second, avatar environments are leveraged effectively when
they support learner-centered team work. Third, avatar worlds endowed with diverse learning resources support a discovery
approach to education. The learning resources may include audio and video on demand, archives of images and schematics,
conventional texts, search tools, objects that can be manipulated and queried, and programmed bots. Bricken (1990) extols
the use of the computer as a reality generator, allowing the user to become a participant in the computational space where
students are involved in activities that require explanation and extrapolation. Constant virtual world feedback provides a
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page    690

continual validation of understanding in a very personalized form of learning. The technology is able to create a superset of
reality and to allow students to learn through what-if scenarios. It provides a natural interface semantics, allowing students
to act out their ideas rather than saying them. Students can also be empowered to participate in virtual world construction.

THE C-VISIONS ENVIRONMENT
In this section, we provide    a  description of the C­VISions   system  in its current  state of development.     We   use the
description of one particular simulation world to highlight key features of the environment. We also explain the basic
system design and implementation.

System Description
The C­VISions    learning   environment is modeled    as an interconnected  virtual   environment consisting    of four levels.
Level 3 is designated the Social World (see Figure 2). The Social World is a general community location for users to
mingle and chat. Users are placed in this world when they first log in to the system.

                                              Figure 2. C­VISions Social World
C­VISions focuses on supporting science learning. Level 1 of the environment, located below (virtual) ground level is the
Chemistry World; level 2, ground level, is the Biology World. Level 4 houses the Physics World. At present, the chemistry
and biology worlds are virtual worlds that contain no learning simulations. We have, however, developed three learning
simulations in the Physics World. These are the Battleships World, the Vacuum Chamber, and the Billiard World. We
chose to focus   initially on the domain of   physics because it is well known    that  students' understandings    of  physics
phenomena   are   replete  with  misconceptions   derived from   real-world  experience   and  intuition  (see, for  example,
McCloskey, 1983).
The top-right corner of the virtual world browser shows two arrows pointing in opposite directions. These arrows are used
to call up and to put away a separate display pane that contains information related to the world the user is currently in. This
information is particularly useful for orienting students to the context and purpose of the learning simulation objects that
they are interacting with. It also provides them with useful tips for interacting with the simulation and some science
concepts for exploratory learning. Figure 3 illustrates the extended information pane of the Vacuum Chamber. The lips icon
and the "T" (for Text) icon below the tool bar allow users to turn on/off system messages in (synthetic) voice mode and in
text mode. Text mode messages are displayed in the horizontal strip to the immediate left of these icons.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                page 691

                                        Figure 3. Vacuum Chamber information pane

Example World: Billiard World
The Billiard World is shown in Figure 4. It contains a billiard table with two balls and a cue stick for striking the balls. In
the Billiard World simulation, students can learn about mass, velocity, acceleration, conservation of momentum, friction,
and the coefficient of restitution.
Navigation and change of viewpoint
The four buttons in the middle section of the tool bar at the bottom of the virtual world browser denote Home, Navigate,
Strafe, and Look respectively. The Home button allows users to reset the view to a default viewpoint. The Navigate button
allows users to move forward and backward and to turn left and right. The Strafe button allows users to move left, right, up,
and down in a vertical plane. The Look button allows users to change their viewpoint--left, right, up, and down. The
interaction style we have defined for the use of these buttons is click-and-drag. Several alternative interaction styles are
possible. We plan to investigate the alternatives systematically at a later date, to identify which style is easiest to learn and
which style is most efficient to use. Together, these four buttons allow users to alter their viewpoint and to navigate within
the virtual environment. Collision detection has been implemented. Users can deactivate this feature, if they wish, from the
Edit menu. To teleport from one environment to another, users can either navigate to the lifts located in the central lift shaft
that connects the four levels of the virtual environment, or they can teleport via the Navigate menu in the system's menu
bar.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  692

                                        Figure 4. C­VISions Billiard World
Object manipulation and interaction
Objects that can be manipulated in the virtual world are known as "live" objects. To enter object manipulation mode, users
select the Hand icon (the highlighted icon in Figure 4). As users move the mouse cursor over the virtual world browser in
this mode, the cursor icon changes to something semantically meaningful when the cursor is positioned over a "live" object.
We refer to these cursor icons as "hot" icons because they provide feedback to users that some action can be immediately
executed on the object over which the cursor is positioned. In Figure 4, for example, the cursor icon showing the hand with
the pointing finger indicates that the cue stick can be used to strike the billiard ball at which the cue stick has been aimed.
The highlighted rear half of the cue stick serves as a reinforcement of feedback that the stick can be thrust forward to hit the
billiard ball at which it is aimed. Certain interactions with objects are more difficult to design than others because they
require a set of sequential, discreet steps. Using the cue stick to strike the billiard ball is such an example. Users must first
select the cue stick to indicate that it is the object that they wish to interact with (initially). The cue stick must then be
aimed at the billiard ball the user intends to strike so that a coupling between the cue stick and the target billiard ball can be
established. Finally, (the system state shown in Figure 4), the user must select the rear end of the cue stick and thrust it
forward to strike the target billiard ball. Research on the design of 3D user interaction styles in desktop virtual worlds is in
its infancy as suggested by Bowman et al (2001). This is an avenue of research that we intend to pursue.
Object inspection and editing
C­VISions has been designed and implemented to allow users to inspect the properties of critical simulation objects in
realtime and to modify the property values on the fly. This functionality      is activated by selecting the Inspect button,
denoted by the magnifying glass icon. (This feature is not illustrated due to lack of space.) Selection of the Editor tab
foregrounds the pane that allows editable values to be changed. This functionality allows users to modify the value(s) of
critical object properties, re-run the simulation, and observe the changes.
Event visualization
C­VISions provides an event visualization function that allows students to replay the most recent simulation event and to
view the plotting of graphs of that event in a synchronized fashion. This function is evoked by clicking on the Visualization
button on the bottom right of the task bar. Figure 5 illustrates how the most recent event can be reenacted in the mini world
browser on the left. As the billiard balls move as a result of one ball being initially struck by the cue stick, the graphs on the
right hand side unfold. The figure shows a plot of distance traversed relative to time. Other graphs showing plots of
horizontal and vertical speed and acceleration can be selected from the pull-down menu shown. The design intention is to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 693

allow students to inter-relate and make sense of the different graph plots. It creates the context for inquiry and discourse-
based learning about the phenomena of mass, velocity, acceleration, friction, and the conservation of momentum and helps
to reify these abstract concepts. The provision of     this tool is consistent with Bowman  et al's (1999)     advocacy of an
"information-rich" virtual environment.

                                        Figure 5. Event visualization in C­VISions
Realtime video streaming
C­VISions allows students to share video resources with other students located in the same virtual world. To do so,
students simply drag the movie file from the computer desktop onto a virtual screen in the virtual world. The video is then
streamed to all computers and played concurrently in the browser of all students in the same world. This functionality
allows video material to be used as a shared referent for sense making dialog. Of course, it can also be used for the purpose
of entertainment in the Social World. Figure 6 illustrates the operation of realtime video streaming. Control buttons on the
posts of the virtual screen allow the initiator of the streamed video to terminate and to replay the video.
Communication
C­VISions supports student-to-student communication via text chat as well as audio chat. These functions are activated by
the two buttons on the extreme left of the tool bar (see Figure 6). As suggested by Riva (1999), virtual reality is not only an
environment for first-person experience, it is also a communication environment. The communication tools provided here
are vital for discourse-based collaborative learning.
Collaboration tools
Finally, C­VISions also incorporates collaboration tools to support higher level representation and organization of ideas.
This function is activated by the third button, from the left, in the tool bar. The collaboration tools provided are a shared
electronic whiteboard and a shared mind map editor.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                     page 694

                                    Figure 6. Realtime video streaming in C­VISions

System Design and Implementation
C­VISions  has been designed     from the outset to be a generic,    object oriented software framework--the VISions©
framework--that can be customized to different applications of the same genre. For example, it can be used to create
military simulations or e-commerce applications. C­VISions is implemented entirely in Java and Java3D. Its design is
based on the Model­View­Controller (MVC) architecture derived from the Smalltalk programming language. The Model
component implements the virtual world, virtual objects, and the underlying laws that govern the behavior of the virtual
objects. The View component implements the virtual world browser. It listens for events and renders them in the 3D
browser. It also implements collision detection. The Controller component implements support for actions taken by the user
in the virtual world browser.
The network component of C­VISions propagates virtual world events from every user to all other users in the same virtual
world. There are two types of events. Semantic events are handled by TCIP/IP. User location change events are handled by
UDP. To support object persistence, the state of all objects in the virtual world is constantly recorded onto a database.
Conflict resolution for concurrent events has also been implemented.
The system-level flow of control and event propagation is depicted in Figure 7. When users interact with objects, the virtual
world is informed of property changes made to the object. The virtual world updates the associated view and propagates
these events to other client computers via the network to achieve synchronization of world state on all clients. Every event
is tagged with the time of occurrence so that the order of events can be preserved and kept consistent across all clients at all
times.
The virtual world (Model) on every client computer propagates events encapsulating changes to virtual objects. Upon
receiving such events, the virtual objects update themselves and route the event to event listeners. The virtual browser
(View) then interprets the events received from the virtual world and renders the updated geometric representations of all
affected virtual objects. A more detailed explanation can be found in Chee and Khoo (2000).
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page 695

                                  Figure 7. Schematic of control flow in C­VISions

CURRENT STATUS AND FUTURE WORK
The C­VISions system has been in development for close to two years. This time frame gives a sense of the design and
development effort involved. A beta Version 4 of the system was released in late June 2001, and a full release Version 1
was launched on 31 August 2001. The C­VISions client can be freely downloaded via the Internet. As the system was built
to be accessible via the Internet and to be used by schoolchildren, both from home as well as from school, we have had to
address many practical networking issues (eg. bandwidth and fast vs. slow connections, firewall and security restrictions).
As it is not possible to instantiate the heterogenous Internet environment within a University network for testing purposes,
we have been forced, of necessity, to rely upon incremental, public releases to test our system, and this is what we have
done.
C­VISions needs several improvements. For example, the audio chat system needs to be enhanced to be on par with the
text chat system in supporting virtual world localization; it is currently a global audio chat system. Our collaboration tools
also need to be improved to better support participant co-awareness in coordinated learning activities. Active work is in
progress on both these fronts. We also plan to support avatar animation and gestures in the near term.
For the future, we  plan to continue populating  the virtual environment with     more simulation      worlds. Upon  system
deployment, we plan to commence empirical research of how students learn with our system and to begin exploring
relationships between the design of the system with the types of concepts or skills to be learned and with individual learner
characteristics. On the user interface front, we plan to study desktop 3D user interaction styles. We also hope to create a
modified version of the system that supports immersive VR. On the technology front, there are many challenging issues
still to be tackled. Chief among these are the issues of scalability, distributed interaction support, failure management, and
high-level semantic modeling for application of the system core to other domains. At the broader social and human-
computer interaction level, we also wish to research issues related to the genesis and maintenance of virtual communities
and to temporal and spatial dimensions of operating in 3D virtual environments.

CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have set out our research work and vision for collaborative, simulation-based learning in desktop VR
environments. Our focus on the desktop variant of VR has the benefit of making the technology widely accessible. From
the perspective  of pedagogy,  our   efforts are rooted  firmly  in active,     experiential learning    and   the ideas  of
constructivism/social constructivism. We have explained the potential power of VR-based learning, especially in respect of
shifting the learner's experience of education from a third person, disembodied perspective of knowledge to a first person,
embodied perspective, using the technology to reify concepts to be learned, and providing the technology scaffolding to
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  696

help students transition from the experiential base of learning to the more symbolic, abstract, and reflective modes of the
learned mind. In the process, we also hope to facilitate the development of communication, collaboration, and coordination
skills in a socialized environment and to foster the building of learning communities.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The contribution of the following students to the project is gratefully acknowledged: Yong Bing Khoo and Siew Mun Ng.
The project is supported by a National University of Singapore research grant, R­252­000­033­112.

REFERENCES
Boethel, M., & Dimock, K. V. (1999). Constructing Knowledge with Technology: A Review of the Literature. Austin, TX:
        Southwest Educational Development Laboratory. (http://www.sedl.org/pubs/tec27/)
Bowman, D. A., Hodges, L. F., Allison, D., & Wineman, J. (1999). The educational value of an information-rich virtual
        environment. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 8(3), 317­331.
Bowman,   D. A., Kruijff, E., LaViola, J. L. J., & Poupyrev,   I. (2001). An   introduction   to 3-D  user interface design.
        Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 10(1), 96­108.
Bricken, M., & Byrne, C. M. (1993). Summer Students in Virtual Reality: A Pilot Study on Educational Applications of
        Virtual Reality Technology. In A. Wexelblat (Ed.), Virtual Reality: Applications and Explorations (pp. 199­217).
        NY: Academic Press.
Bricken, W. (1990). Learning in Virtual Reality. (http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/m-90-5/)
Chee, Y. S., & Khoo, Y. B. (2000). Designing extensible simulation-oriented collaborative learning virtual environments.
        In Proceedings of ICCE 2000, pp. 222­230, Taipei, Taiwan.
Damer, B. (1998). Avatars! Exploring and Building Virtual Worlds on the Internet. Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press.
Dean, K. L., Asay-Davis, X. S., Finn, E. M., Friesner, J. A., Imai, Y., Naylor, B. J., Wustner, S. R., Fisher, S. S., & Wilson,
        K. R. (2000). Virtual Explorer: Interactive virtual environment for education. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
        Environments, 9(6), 505­523.
Dewey, J. (1916/1980). Democracy and Education. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Doolittle, P. E. (1999). Constructivism and Online Education. (http://www.tandl.vt.edu/doolittle/tohe/tohe2.html/)
Foreman, J. (1999). Avatar Pedagogy. (http://horizon.unc.edu/TS/vu/1999-11.asp/)
Fosnot, C. T. (Ed.). (1996). Constructivism: Theory, Perspectives, and Practice. NY: Teachers College Press.
Frécon, E., Smith, G., Steed,  A., Stenius, M.,  & Ståhl, O.  (2001). An  overview     of the COVEN    platform. Presence:
        Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 10(1), 109­127.
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
        Prentice-Hall.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Intuitive physics. Scientific American, 248(4), 114­122.
Mills, S., & de Araújo, M. M. T. (1999). Learning through virtual reality: a preliminary investigation. Interacting with
        Computers, 11, 453­462.
Normand, V. (1999). The COVEN project: Exploring applicative, technical, and usage dimensions of collaborative virtual
        environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 8(2), 218­236.
Riva, G. (1999). Virtual reality as a communication tool: A sociocognitive analysis. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
        Environments, 8(4), 462­468.
Salzman, M. C., Dede, C., Loftin, R. B., & Chen, J. (1999). A model for understanding how virtual reality aids complex
        conceptual learning. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 8(3), 293­316.
Singhal, S., & Zyda, M. (1999). Networked Virtual Environments: Design and Implementation. NY: ACM Press.
Winn,    W.     (1993).    A    Conceptual       Basis    for   Educational     Applications       of   Virtual      Reality.
        (http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/r-93-9/)
Winn, W., Hoffman, H., Hollander, A., Osberg, K., Rose, H., & Char, P. (1999). Student-built virtual environments.
        Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 8(3), 283­292.
