Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page  697

             D. ONLINE COMMUNITIES

Developing a Shared Language for Discussing Networked
                                            Learning Systems
 Herbert Remidez, Joshua S. Gottdenker, James M. Laffey, Dale R. Musser, Ran-Young Hong,
                                     Linda Espinosa, Christopher J. Amelung
    herbert@coe.missouri.edu, jsg0af@mizzou.edu, laffeyj@missouri.edu, musserda@missouri.edu,
                  rhe06@mizzou.edu, espinosal@missouri.edu, chrisa@coe.missouri.edu,
             Center for Technology Innovations in Education, University of Missouri-Columbia
ABSTRACT
New network-based learning systems are coming into use that offer the possibility of integrating curriculum experiences
and student information systems as well as changing the metaphor of the Internet from library to workspace. We will call
these integrated and process oriented systems Networked Learning Systems (NLS). A NLS is tentatively defined as a
program or set of programs designed to operate over a network and support users as they undertake tasks or participate in
processes related to learning. CSCL is one type, albeit an important one, of process that can be enabled by NLS. This
interactive event is intended to help participants build a shared language to facilitate discussions related to NLS. Through
participation in a series of online and face-to-face activities, participants will build knowledge of many networked learning
systems currently available, identify important dimensions of these systems, understand what aspects of those dimensions
are important  and  why,  and    develop an understanding   of  how  the work    they are doing relates to the   field of   NLS.
Participants  in  this  session   will   undertake  the  online   activities  within  the  Shadow   netWorkspaceTM        (SNS)
(http://sns.internetschools.org), a NLS  being   developed  by  the Center   for Technology  Innovation  in    Education  at the
University of Missouri-Columbia.

Keywords
Networked Learning Systems, Shadow netWorkspace

EVENT DESCRIPTION
One week prior to the conference, those wishing to participate should email Herbert Remidez at herbert@coe.missouri.edu
and notify him that they would like to sign up for the CSCL interactive session titled "Developing a Shared Language for
Discussing Networked Learning Systems." Interested parties will receive directions on how to access a set of activities that
guide them   through   reviewing  a collection  of similar systems, related  white papers,  and research publications.    While
undertaking   these  activities,  participants will use    the Shadow    netWorkspace's    communication       support tools  to
collaboratively identify important characteristics and dimensions of networked learning systems. Participants will then
come together for a face-to-face at the CSCL conference to discuss their findings, continue building a shared vocabulary for
discussing NLS, and discussing how their work relates to the field of networked learning systems. To enhance participants'
learning, the co-presenters will interact with participants throughout the online and face-to-face activities.

EXAMPLES
Participants will employ SNS to complete a series of online activities designed to help them build their knowledge of
networked learning systems. These activities will guide participants through the exploration and identification of important
dimensions of networked learning systems. As part of these activities, participants will employ functions of SNS such as
asynchronous and synchronous communication tools, workgroups, and the file management system. A face-to-face session
will then follow where participants will undertake activities designed to help them share their new knowledge and continue
building a shared vocabulary for discussing NLS.
