Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 698

     L³ - An Infrastructure for Collaborative Learnflow
                           Martin Wessner, Peter Dawabi, Jörg M. Haake
             GMD ­ German National Research Center for Information Technology
                Integrated Publication and Information Systems Institute (IPSI)
                             Dolivostr. 15, D-64293 Darmstadt, Germany
                             {wessner, dawabi, haake}@darmstadt.gmd.de
ABSTRACT
In this paper we sketch an approach to integrate courses for individual learning into a powerful CSCL environment by
using the Point of Cooperation (PoC) approach. We show how PoCs can be set up to create a collaborative learnflow,
which exploits individual learning phases as well as different phases of asynchronous and synchronous collaboration. The
implementation of the PoC approach in the L³ project is presented.

Keywords
CSCL, collaborative learnflow, Point of Cooperation (PoC), L3.

MOVING FROM INDIVIDUAL TO COLLABORATIVE LEARNFLOW
How can new learning technologies support cooperative learning? In general, three basic types of learning processes can be
differentiated in computer supported learning: Individual learning, synchronous and asynchronous collaborative learning:
Individual learning describes a scenario with a single learner performing a learning activity without others (such as peer
learners or tutors). This includes activities such as reading a text, watching a video, reflecting on a picture or writing a
summary. The learner can control the learning process, e.g., the speed and the number of iterations.
Synchronous collaborative learning is based on immediate learning together with peer learners or tutors. Here, the learner
has less control over the learning process. Activities must be coordinated with the other group members.
Asynchronous collaborative learning happens when a learner manipulates an artifact (such as a document or a message),
which has been or will be handled by one or more peers or tutors at a different point in time. Here, the learner has more
control over the learning process opposed to synchronous collaboration, e.g. w.r.t. time and place.
Usually, a learner is confronted with different kinds of problems while working on a course. In order to deal with these
problems without switching between different learning environments, an ideal learning environment should support flexible
coupling and combination of the mentioned learning scenarios during a learning process. Concretely, the learner should be
able to switch between synchronous and asynchronous communication in an intuitive way: If the learner needs immediate
connection, the required tools should provide the demanded communication channels instantly. Alternatively the learner
should have immediate access to asynchronous communication channels if there is no need or opportunity for real-time
communication with a peer learner or a tutor.
                                                               We consider a course as a set of learning objects interlinked
                                                               by  relations.    Each learning   object describes   a learning
                                                               activity  to   be   performed   (such    as  reading   material,
                                                               performing     an exercise). The  course  resembles  a  schema
                                                               definition of potential learner behaviour, i.e. in each phase
                                                               of the learning process the learner can proceed to another
                                                               learning  object   to  extend her  knowledge.  The     learnflow
                                                               describes a concrete sequence of activities in that schema.
                                                               During individual learning in a course, the learner initiates
                                                               his learnflow by performing the start activity, e.g. reading
                                                               the title page    of  the course.  He extends   his  individual
                                                               learnflow  stepwise    with   each new    learning  activity he
 Figure 1: Collaborative learnflow of the learners L1 and      performs in the course; the learnflow consists of a sequence
 L2                                                            of activities.
                                                               If a course can be used by a learning group in the way that
                                                               learners perform (some of the) course's activities together
then we define the collaborative learnflow as the graph consisting of the individual learnflows where activities, which are
performed collaboratively, are merged. Figure 1 shows the collaborative learnflow of two learners, which collaborated on
Learning Object #4. During cooperative learning, the collaborative learnflow defines the joint behaviour of the learning
group and the interactions between the learning partners.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page    699

We call an oportunitiy to cooperate given a specific learning context a Point of Cooperation (PoC) (see Wessner & Pfister,
2000 for more details). We call a cooperative activity an intended cooperation if it is logically and didactically incorporated
into a course at a specific position in the course. The corresponding component in the learning environment is called an
Intended Point  of Cooperation   (IPoC). From  a      structural point of  view IPoCs    are treated in the  same way  as   non-
collaborative learning objects: IPoCs are related to other learning objects of the course. With IPoCs the course author can
define "when", i.e. at which position in the locigal course structure, "what" cooperative activity should be performed. The
cooperative activity is defined by a set of parameters, such as group size, duration, instructions, learning material, tools, and
structure (a system-controlled cooperative learning method). Depending on the nature of the cooperative activity the group
has to perform,  we distinguish  a number  of  IPoC    types.,   e.g. group discussion,  collaborative  brainstorming, pro/con-
dispute, cooperative text processing. An IPoC is integrated into a course as a learning object. Thus, an IPoC can use the
knowledge about the author's intentions to support the user in his collaboration. Using PoCs smooth transitions between the
individual and collaborative learning scenarios can be achieved: A user starts in individual learning. If the user encounters
an IPoC in the course, the user can initiate an intended collaborative learning activity. Because the actual performing of the
collaborative activity depends on runtime requirements, especially the availability of peer learners, encountering an IPoC
and activating it are two separate steps. Otherwise the non-availability of peers would block the learner. Upon ending the
IPoC tool the learner is back to individual learning.

IMPLEMENTATION: THE L³ PROJECT
In the L³ project, which stands for `lifelong learning', twenty organizations cooperate to develop an integrated Internet-
based  learning infrastructure for life-long learning    and     continued  training. The partners   include infrastructure and
technology providers, content providers, training organisations, and research institutions with a didactical or technical
focus. In L³, web-based courses consists of a number of learning objects. Especially, a learning object can be an IPoC, as
explained previously. IPoCs are defined as learning objects by the author during the course design using an IPoC editor.
E.g. for a brainstorming activity definition, the author defines group size, duration, topic, seed words and instructions for
the intended brainstorming activity. The course material is presented in a web browser to the learner. An additional tool, the
L³ Communicator provides the means to start IPoCs after they have been reached in the course material by the learner. The
so-called PoC-Pool, a view of the L³ Communicator, is used to manage all IPoCs of a learner. The actual instantiation of an
IPoC is a non-trivial task, e.g. participants need to be selected according to appropriate criteria, matching communication
tools have to be activated, and the results of the cooperation processes need to be handled. Learning groups are formed
manually by a tutor or automatically by the system. A number of tools supporting specific cooperative learning methods,
i.e. the IPoC types mentioned above, have been developed. Currently, version 2 of the platform has been deployed to ten
learning centers throughout Germany in 2001. Authors were trained in special workshops to integrate collaborative learning
into their courses. We are preparing a large-scale evaluation of the L³ environment to learn about the usability and the
acceptance of the PoC approach.
Compared   to   existing CSCL   environments   an     environment     based on  the   PoC    approach  supports individual  and
collaborative learnflows. With PoCs, course authors can flexibly define collaborative activities integrated with the course
w.r.t. to group size, learning method, duration etc. Thus, in the environment presented here, learnflows cover individual and
collaborative learning scenarios and feature a variety of collaborative learning methods. In general, this approach allows
new ways to represent and analyse group learning behaviour.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks go to Daniel Tietze, Badie Garzaldeen, Martin Mühlpfordt, and Jessica Rubart for help with implementing the L³
software. The L³ project is funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research (grant 21B8196B).

REFERENCES
Wessner, M., Pfister, H.-R. (2000). Points of cooperation: Integrating cooperative learning into web-based courses. Proc. of
         the Workshop "New Technologies for collaborative learning" NTCL 2000, Japan, November 2000.
