Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page 702

             E. PDAS AND UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING

The Impact of Distributed and Ubiquitous Computational
     Devices on the Collaborative Learning Environment
                                                      Eric Klopfer
                                       Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                                   klopfer@mit.edu
                                                    Earl Woodruff
                                                       OISE/UT
                                              ewoodruff@oise.utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
Recent advances in small, personalized computing devices have made possible distributed and ubiquitous computing within
the classroom. This creates a fundamentally different environment from one that has 4 or 5 desktop machines per classroom
(Soloway et al., 2001). In this paper we sketch out the impact that Thinking Tags can have on the teaching and learning
environment.

Keywords
Participatory Simulations, Wearables, Decentralized Systems, Distributed Computing, Collaborative Discourse

INTRODUCTION
Participatory Simulations use small, wearable computers to involve people in simulations that are mediated, in part, by
technology (Colella, 2000). Each participant wears a small computer, called a Thinking Tag (Borovoy et al., 1996), that
executes rules and keeps track of important information during the simulation. The computers themselves are brightly
decorated with legos and are adorned with two displays ­ a two-digit LED and a series of 5 colored LEDs. The devices
communicate through infrared, and are extremely simple, making them almost transparent to the participants during the
simulation. The simulation results from the interactions between the rules that are programmed into the computers and
adopted behavior. For instance, in the first activity developed for this platform, participants met each other and information
was passed that may have infected an individual's tag. Working collaboratively, students determined the rules by which the
virus starts and gets passed around.
Colella's research has shown   that   this technology can simultaneously  engage  a wide   range of students in   scientific
investigation and discovery. To capitalize on the potential of these tools and further the research we have developed new
simulations for this platform. These include:
   ·   Big Fish Little Fish immerses participants in the fight for survival, as little fish scavenge for food and big fish
       attack little fish, and provokes an examination of the roles of collaboration and competition in systems.
   ·   Tit for Tat allows participants to investigate how cooperation can evolve in communities over time as they play the
       classic Prisoner's Dilemma with each other to try to gain the most points.
   ·   Dental Health encourages children, through kinetic make-believe, to mingle about the room and "snack" on foods
       or "brush" to get their teeth clean. Lights on a thinking tag display healthy and diseased imaginary teeth. The goal
       is to maintain healthy teeth throughout the game
   ·   Genetics engages students in a simulated inheritance situation. Each Tag is pre-programmed with a genotype that
       is to be discerned by students as they meet with other Tags and observe the total probability and random selection
       of eye colour resulting from each encounter.
   ·   Issues  Based   Science uses   the  Tags to publicly display the stance and  values students hold on  the   issue of
       genetically modified foods. Students use this public information to decide whom they wish to try and convert to
       their position.
CLASSROOM IMPLEMENTATION
Currently, the goals for the Thinking Tag technology are two fold: (1) to investigate how teachers can use the Tags to
improve science teaching, and (2) to explore how the Tags can help us understand the collaborative learning process.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page   703

Addressing the first goal, we have developed strategies to help teachers create more powerful learning experiences for their
students. Our experience with the StarLogo Community of Learners workshops (Colella, et al., 1999) in which we teach
teachers to develop their own models of complex, dynamic systems using StarLogo suggests that this is an effective
professional development strategy. Clearly, for one teacher, the workshop pinpointed the beginning of his involvement with
integrating technology into his classroom, "...When we both saw the kind of scientific thinking and redesigning and re-
experimenting and re-editing which we don't have time to do--or don't take time to do--in our labs. We could, but we
don't. [With the tags] the kids could change their variables in any way they wanted to, and that was an incredibly powerful
experience for them." Another teacher combined the Tit for Tat game with computer simulations and a game in which the
students had to develop cooperative strategies in order to consume the most M&Ms using four-foot long spoons. This
combination created collaborative discourse unlike any that the teacher had seen before. Students brought in references
from history, social science and even the popular show "Survivor" in which they described the first season's winner as a
"defector" and the second season's winner as a "cooperator." Yet another teacher ran the disease simulation in his seventh
and eighth grade science classes over three days. However, unlike in our workshop where the primary goal of the activity is
to gain a deeper understanding of systems, this teacher adapted the activity to fit into a unit on epidemiology and combined
the tag activity with related written assignments on specific diseases. This activity generated interest on the part of both the
teacher and the students to create a modified version of the disease game to reflect characteristics of other viruses.
Our second goal of using the Tags to explore collaborative learning processes points to three emerging themes. The first is
that the Tags make some of the covert collaborative process in social constructed knowledge overt. When 4 and 5-year old
children were involved in the dental health activity it became apparent that they were watching what happened to each
other's tags. On  the   surface their behavior  appeared  very     individualistic and non-collaborative.   Closer  examination
indicated, however, they were using the collective data to form their ideas about when to brush and the consequences
certain foods had on one's teeth. The second theme is that the public display of first-person information on the tags
highlights interactions between   the affective and cognitive  domains.   Students    in the  issues based science  activity, for
example,   became visibly nervous   when   another  student approached    them     displaying a tag  that indicated no  one   had
managed to change her mind. "She's scary!" one of the group noted as they tried to avoid talking to her. The third theme
features the role of evidence in what Scardamalia has called epistemic agency. Epistemic agency involves assumption of
control over one's knowledge-building processes. Participants in the genetics simulation activity give us some insight into
this process when they overtly formulate critical hypotheses and then seek individuals with tags that will give them the data
they need.

NEXT STEPS
As distributed and ubiquitous computing devices become more common place, other researchers (Soloway et al., 2001;
Wilensky   &  Stroup,   1999) are  porting similar  activities to   more common      devices   such  as   Palm OS   devices   and
programmable calculators. Therefore, one of our next steps is to systematically analyze how the Tag specific affordances
impacts collaboration. At this point we conjecture that the unobtrusive, fun, simple and non-technical nature of the tags can
provide a qualitatively different experience for the participants.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Support for this research is provided, in part, by the the Imperial Oil Center for Science Math and Technology at OISE/UT
as well as the MIT Media Laboratory and MIT Teacher Education Program.

REFERENCES
Borovoy, R., McDonald, M., Martin, F., & Resnick, M. (1996). Things that blink: Computationally augmented name tags.
   IBM Systems Journal, 35, 3, 488-495.
Colella, V. (2000). Participatory Simulations: Building collaborative understanding through immersive dynamic modeling.
   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 9, 4, 471-500.
Colella, V., Klopfer, E., & Resnick, M. (1999). StarLogo Community of Learners Workshop. Logo Exchange, Journal of
   the ISTE Special Interest Group for Logo-Using Educators, 17, 2.
Soloway, E., Norris, C., Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B., Krajcik, J., & Marx R. (2001) Log on Education Handheld Devices
   are Ready-at-Hand. Communications of the ACM, 44, 6.
Wilensky,  U.  &  Stroup, W.    (1999). Learning  through   Participatory Simulations:    Network-Based     Design  for Systems
   Learning in Classrooms. Paper presented at CSCL '99. Stanford University, CA.
