Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                        page 704

      Using Handhelds to Support Collaborative Learning
  Kathleen Luchini, Chris Quintana, Michael Curtis, Richard Murphy, Joseph Krajcik, Elliot
                                           Soloway, Daniel Suthers*
                          University of Michigan, *University of Hawai`i at Manoa
      {kluchini, quintana, micurtis, murphyr, krajcik, soloway}@umich.edu; suthers@hawaii.edu
ABSTRACT
Research suggests that collaborative classroom activities offer many benefits for learning. To collaborate successfully,
students need adequate tools to share ideas and resources, develop and support arguments, and cooperate to solve problems.
Handheld computers are emerging as a flexible and portable solution that provides students with "ready to hand" support to
engage in collaborative activities anytime, anywhere. Handhelds can also be coordinated with desktops to support small
group collaboration when larger workspaces are needed.

Keywords
Handheld computers, collaborative learning, wireless Internet, concept maps.

INTRODUCTION
While traditional K-12  education  models  focus on  individual  learning,   abundant   research   has led to  an               emerging
understanding of the benefits of collaborative learning. By cooperatively completing shared tasks, students can generate
ideas, explore concepts, share resources, and construct arguments to build deeper understanding. In order to participate
fully in collaborative activities, students must have access to a wide variety of information, understand the processes and
skills required by the task, and become proficient in new terminology and content materials. One way to address these
needs is to use a Scaffolded Work Environment, or SWEts (Luchini, Oehler, Quintana, & Soloway, 2001). While desktop
SWEts like Symphony (Quintana, Eng, Carra, Wu, & Soloway, 1999) and Belvedere (Suthers, Toth, & Weiner, 1997) are
powerful tools for learners, too often desktops in schools are confined to labs and libraries and the student-to-computer
ratio is too high to allows students regular access to the machines. Handheld devices (such as Palms and PocketPCs) offer
the opportunity to provide each student with their own computer. The mobility, flexibility and instant access of handheld
devices means that they are "ready to hand," allowing students to engage in highly collaborative activities anywhere,
anytime (Soloway et al., 2001). To help students use handheld devices as learning tools, the Center for Highly Interactive
Computing in Education (hi-ce) at the University of Michigan has developed several educational applications designed
specifically to take advantage of the mobility, flexibility, and easy collaboration engendered by handheld computers. Yet,
desktop and projected workspaces will still play an important role in group activities, providing additional workspace that
enables students to compare their work while also benefiting from the scaffolding of SWEts. In this paper we introduce
some  of  of our handheld applications and describe an  activity scenario  for coordinated  use    of handheld              and  desktop
educational applications. This scenario will be simulated in the conference interactive session.

EDUCATIONAL APPLICATIONS FOR PALM DEVICES
Hi-ce has developed a number of educational applications for use on Palm devices (Table 1). These programs have been
used successfully in a number of classrooms in Michigan, and hundreds of copies have been distributed to educators across
the country. The applications provide a wide range of features, and are designed to be both educational and academically
flexible. These programs are available free of charge at http://www.hi-ce.org/palms.
                                  Table 1: Educational Applications for Palm Devices

Application        Description
 PiCoMap           Allows students to create, share, and explore concept maps consisting of nodes connected by directed arcs.
 Fling-It          Allows students to instantaneously "fling" websites from a desktop computer to their handheld devices for off-
                   line reading to build a personal library of websites with reference materials, news, reading materials, etc.
 Go `n Tell        Combines the Kodak PalmPix camera and a Palm computer to allow students to take pictures, annotate them,
                   share the resulting "scrapbook pages" with each other, and instantly create a website displaying their work.
 Cooties           A virus-transfer simulation. Teachers determine parameters for "coodles"--Cooties characters that "live" on
                   students' Palm devices. Coodles meet each other via beaming, and some coodles will become "sick". Students
                   then collaborate to determine which coodles were initial carriers and trace the virus transmission path.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                page    705

CLASSROOM EXPERIENCES
During    the  2001-2002      school     year, hi-ce  is  working    with  two   eighth
grade science classes at Greenhills School in Ann Arbor, Michigan, to
study  how      students      can use     handheld    devices    to collaborate.     We
provided each student with a Compaq iPAQ running Windows CE. The
handhelds     have  a   wireless   network     card   for Internet   access,  and    can
"beam"     data   using  infrared  technology.      We    wrote  a  concept   mapping
tool for   the  iPAQs    called   Pocket      PiCoMap,    which  allows   students    to
build collections       of  nodes    indicating     main  ideas   and   directed     arcs
connecting     them     (Figure   1).    The   teacher   asked   the  class   to make
individual concept maps, exchange maps with a partner (by beaming),
and  then     write comments       about   their partner's    map    using   the "Map
Notes"    feature   and    beam   the    annotated    map  back  to  its  owner.     The
collaborative activity of exchanging and critiquing each others' work led
many students to discuss various ideas and revise their own maps to                                Figure 19: Student's Weather
include additional information or different perspectives.                                                              Concept Map

COORDINATING DESKTOP AND HANDHELD APPLICATIONS
Hi-ce and the Laboratory for Interactive Learning Technologies of the University Hawai`i at Manoa are working together to
explore the synergy between handheld and desktop tools for helping students collaborate. While handheld computers can
offer each student access to personal computing, the limited screen space of handheld devices suggests a remaining role for
desktop systems to support group work, where the higher student-to-computer ratio is not an issue. In our CSCL 2002
interactive session we will explore an activity scenario in which individual work done on handhelds is transferred to the
desktop for small group and full group manipulation and discussion of the knowledge artifacts. Individual concept maps are
first constructed on handhelds and refined by pairwise collaborations using infrared networking as described above. Then
these maps      are uploaded      to   a  PC   into a  version   of  Belvedere    (Suthers,    Toth   &    Weiner,  1997)  designed   to    support
comparative concept mapping. Small groups of learners display their concept maps side by side and merge them into a
consensual knowledge artifact. The juxtaposition of individual work confronts students with alternate conceptions and
prompts the justification of their own choices (activities known to improve learning), while the visual representations also
help coordinate and ground their conversations. In classrooms with projection devices the resulting group maps might then
be merged      into a   class-wide     concept   map.    Grounded    in  this hands-on     experience,     interactive session  participants    will
discuss strategies for maximizing the potential of both handheld and desktop devices for education.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Microsoft, Intel,  Palm Inc., National Science Foundation  Grant Number  NSF   ITR   0085946  and  a Graduate Research Fellowship supported the hi-ce
efforts. National Science Foundation Grant No. 9873516 supported the Belvedere efforts. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed  in this material are those  of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Science Foundation. We would also  like to
acknowledge Andrew Carra, the original PiCoMap developer; Chris Farah, Nayan Nandihalli, Kyle Reese and Adam Wieczorek for their work with the
PocketPC project; and David Burger, Bruce Harris and Nick Ni for bringing Belvedere and PiCoMap together.

REFERENCES
Luchini, K., Oehler, P., Quintana, C., & Soloway, E. (2001, 2001). An Engineering Process for Constructing Scaffolded
           Work Environments to Support Student Inquiry: A Case Study in History. Paper presented at the ICALT 2001,
           Madison, WI.
Metcalf, S. J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2000). Model-It: A Design Retrospective. In M. J. Jacobson & R. B. Kozma
           (Eds.), Innovations in Science and Mathematics Education: Advanced Design for Technologies of Learning (pp.
           77-115). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Assoc.
Quintana, C., Eng, J., Carra, A., Wu, H. K., & Soloway, E. (1999). Symphony: A Case Study in Extending Learner-
           Centered Design Through Process Space Analysis, Human Factors in Computing Systems: CHI '99 Proceedings
           (pp. 473-480). Pittsburgh, PA: ACM.
Soloway, E., Norris, C., Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. (2001). Handheld Devices are Ready-at-
           Hand. Communications of the ACM, 44(6), 15-20.
Suthers, D., Toth, E., and Weiner, A. (1997, December). An integrated approach to implementing collaborative inquiry in
           the classroom. In Proc. 2nd International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL'97)
           (pp. 272-279). Toronto.
