Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page   706

   Orchestrating Handhelds in the Classroom with SRI's
                                                    ClassSyncTM
                                              Chris DiGiano, Charles Patton
                                 SRI International, Center for Technology in Learning
                                                    chris.digiano@sri.com
ABSTRACT
In our   interactive  experience,  we   address  the  problem   of  a  teacher  or other leader managing      the use of  electronic
communication devices by their students. We have embedded the control elements into the physical class structure itself so
that the teacher may control the interactive system by moving about the classroom and interacting with the devices therein.
We  have    shifted  control from  a    teacher-controlled display  in a static location  to a  teacher's  dynamic  control   that is
interactive    with items   spatially distributed  in  the room.   Our   demonstration   shows    how this    orchestration   can  be
accomplished with low-cost infrared communications as opposed to more expensive radio-based solutions.

Keywords
Handhelds, design, wireless networking, classroom workflow

INTRODUCTION
In the  next   few   years, advances    in handheld   computing,   and  wireless   networks  will enable   portable  1:1 classroom
computing    with   ubiquitous  networking.   Even   more   so than   with desktop   computers,   technology  employing     Wireless
Internet Learning     Devices    (WILD)    enable  individual  learners  to  participate in  synchronous    collaborative     learning
experiences. However, this technology will undoubtedly shift the role of the classroom teacher. Whereas in traditional
lecture classes the teacher is often characterized as the "sage-on-the-stage" and in modern CSCL contexts as the "guide-by-
the-side," a new metaphor is needed to capture the role of the teacher in a WILD classroom.
WILD classrooms will demand that teachers manage real-time performance of classroom activities. Management tasks
include  (a)   distributing and  collecting  work,  (b) enabling   students to  collaborate  in groups,   (c) monitoring  real-time
progress  with      respect  to  learning  objectives,  and    (d)  controlling  cheating,   note-passing,  and    other  disruptive
communications. All of this must be accomplished without overburdening the teacher, compromising the already limited
handheld battery life, or pushing the cost out of the reach of the educational market.
In our  demonstration,    we    explore a  new  metaphor   where   the teacher  is a "conductor"  or "orchestrator"   of classroom
performances involving their students. The teacher attends primarily to group performance, not to each individual student.
Moreover, the teacher, like the conductor, has responsibility for choosing and sequencing the material to be performed (the
curricular activities), interpreting the performance, and guiding it toward its desired end. As in rehearsal, the conductor
might direct groups of students to practice something alone, or in small groups. During performance, the teacher will work
to ensure that all parts are "heard," that everyone gives their best performance--directing attention towards the students
who need the most encouragement while keeping the overall performance moving forward. Moreover, like a conductor, the
teacher will want to monitor individual participation to ensure that all the students are productively contributing to the
classroom performance.

CLASSSYNC
We  have    drawn    on SRI's   expertise  in  mobile   ad hoc  networks,   handheld   devices,  security, learning   sciences,   and
educational technology research and development to assemble a suite of technologies collectively known as ClassSyncTM.
ClassSync makes it possible, for the first time, for teachers to orchestrate the flows of work and conversation among
wireless classroom participants in a manner that transparently maps onto how teachers routinely manage classroom work
and conversation flow.
Teachers interact with ClassSync at a high level by creating groups and assigning activities to them. ClassSync automates
the details of creating a group by notifying students that they now belong to a group, by making resources available to the
group, and enabling resource sharing and messaging. ClassSync automates the details of activity assignment, assigns roles
to members, and transitions to the next activity when the activity completes.
As a sample ClassSync-enabled application, we have created, for the Palm PDA, a version of the classic Gopher client and
enhanced    it with  text   and image   editing as well  as revising   the protocol  for infrared beaming.    We   use   this sample
application to illustrate the key ideas of our system. The Palm-based ClassSync also demonstrates how orchestration can be
accomplished with low-cost infrared communications as opposed to more expensive radio-based solutions (e.g. Airport or
IEEE 802.11b.)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                       page 707

ABOUT THE INTERACTIVE EXPERIENCE
The objective of the interactive experience is to give participants a hands-on sense of what it would be like to be a teacher
or student in a WILD classroom. Participants will each be given a Palm device and asked to take part in a role playing
activity. One will be selected as the teacher and the rest will assume the role of students. The activity will involve the
following 5 phases:

1. Introduction Phase
The goal is to introduce basics of Palm operation including turning on and off, choosing menus and applications,
and using the pop-up keyboard, and introduce the beaming concept by creating a business card and beaming it to
a neighbor.

2. Take Attendance Phase
The goal is to introduce the notion of beaming points, illustrate switching beaming point configurations on the
fly, illustrate a take-attendance      capability, insure all participants have Gopher installed     with appropriate
contract, familiarize the participants with Gopher basics, and illustrate the concept of contracts

3. Preparing Teams Phase
The goal is to introduce the process of posting documents with the Gopher application, introduce the notion of
share pair contracts, show basic typical operations involved for a teacher to form a new group, and introduce
differentiated beaming points and how their configuration can be switched on the fly.

4. Collaboration Phase
The goal is to illustrate the use of beaming in a collaborative activity, and demonstrate the fun side collaboration and
illustrate how it can be controlled.

5. Quiz Phase
The goal is to illustrate the mass distribution of contracts, illustrate the element of `consideration', and show
how the system can dynamically limit access.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to the many contributors from the WILD and SimCalc teams: John Brecht, Mark Chung, Tristan de Frondeville,
Jim Kaput, Sarah Lewis, Judy Li, Roy Pea, Jeremy Roschelle, Deborah Tatar, Phil Vahey, and Wenming Ye. We gratefully
acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation, SRI International, Palm Inc., and Texas Instruments.
