Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page    710

 The Knowledge Loom: Supporting School Improvement
     Through Online Dissemination of Best Practices and
              Collaborative Inquiry to Put Them into Action
                           Martin Huntley, Mary Anne Mather, Stephanie Feger
  Northeast & Islands Regional Educational Laboratory, The Education Alliance, Brown University
              (Martin_Huntley@brown.edu, Mary_Anne_Mather@brown.edu, Stephanie_Feger@brown.edu)

ABSTRACT
The  Knowledge    Loom   (http://knowledgeloom.org)    web    site, its companion    Professional Development     Workbook,   and
content partner data-input interface are examples of technology-supported tools intended to build learning communities that
develop teaching expertise. The goal is to collect distributed teaching and learning knowledge and begin the process of
weaving it into a rich tapestry of understanding of teaching and learning. The Knowledge Loom is a place where the work
of educational researchers and practitioners comes together to put what works in teaching and learning into practice.

KEYWORDS
professional development, community building, technology, collaborative inquiry, interactive tools, K-12, best practices,
proven practices, research-based, research to practice, collegial sharing, knowledge building

INTRODUCTION
Margaret   Riel, Associate Director  at   the Center  for Collaborative    Research   in Education,  notes that   "Expert teacher
knowledge   is   not routinely  recorded, negotiated, and  stored    in  community    spaces  for use  by  new  members    of the
community." Riel cites The Knowledge Loom: What Works in Teaching & Learning (http://knowledgeloom.org) as an
example of a Web-based resource that exemplifies a new way of thinking about teacher expertise. The Knowledge Loom
supports community-oriented models of professional development in four ways: (1) free, easy-to-use, online access to rich
content about exemplary practices in K-12 education; (2) a suite of interactive tools that encourage broad sharing of
educational practice/experience; (3) a Workbook that outlines a series of collaborative inquiry activities focused around
Knowledge Loom content; (4) a Web-based administrative interface that allows selected content partners to regularly add
content to the   best-practices database. The  Knowledge    Loom     is the    2001 recipient of the Distinguished  Achievement
Award in the category of technology-supported professional development from the Educational Publishers Association.

WHAT IS THE KNOWLEDGE LOOM?
The Knowledge Loom is a rich database of proven educational practices structured around theme-based collections called
"spotlights." Spotlights  contain  lists and  explanations of  best   practices,  supporting  success  stories from schools   and
teachers, pointers to research, links to related resources that can be found on other Web sites, and a set of interactive tools
that prompt   users  to input  knowledge   of their own.   In some      cases, these interactive tools include  a threaded panel
discussion with experts in the field. The goal is, through a series of both on site and online opportunities, to collect
fragments of teaching and learning knowledge and experience from participants and begin the process of weaving them into
a rich tapestry of understanding of teaching and learning.

HOW DOES THE KNOWLEDGE LOOM SUPPORT PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT?
Teachers sometimes say that the best kind of professional development comes from talking with other teachers--they can
get advice that feels practical and relevant. The Knowledge Loom and its companion Professional Development Workbook
are predicated on the value of educators talking together, sharing their insights, and asking questions together. But in order
for this exchange to be meaningful and effective, the discussion must be focused around educationally sound content, like
the content provided on The Knowledge Loom. Educators access The Knowledge Loom collections to locate selected
information, as needed, for school improvement planning and inspiration, pose important questions for answers from both
local colleagues and others knowledgeable in the field, and contribute expertise via the various interactive components.
Sometimes growing professionally simply means finding colleagues with whom to bounce ideas around. The Knowledge
Loom and companion Workbook present many opportunities to exchange ideas and broaden understanding about effective
education practice, whether the colleagues are in the same school/district or across the country.

HOW IS CONTENT PROVIDED?
The database content presented online comes from many places, including professional and technical assistance partner
organizations (some funded by the U.S. Department of Education), private developers/providers of educational products
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  711

and services, and individual teachers and administrators in schools and districts. The Knowledge Loom regularly develops
and spotlights best practice information about topics that concern K-12 educators today. These currently include literacy,
equity,  technology, math,   school organization, community    involvement,  and professional development.    An     Web-based
administrative interface is provided for content provider organizations to input their information and findings, and link
these to appropriate best practices, stories, and resources for appropriate search results. In addition, interactive tools located
throughout the web site are available for all users to add their own threads of wisdom and experience to the content.

WHY A KNOWLEDGE LOOM?
The loom as a metaphor suggests a work in progress, a workspace where selected and varied threads are drawn together to
craft a cohesive, unique, and useful fabric. The Knowledge Loom web site offers an online workspace where education-
minded users can weave distributed threads of information and experience together in such a way as to create a fabric that
wears well on their own conditions, needs, and visions for excellence in teaching and learning. The Knowledge Loom
provides the content that supports collaborative professional development initiatives.

OUTLINE OF PRESENTATION/DEMO
Online   tour of The  Knowledge     Loom  to learn how    to access theme-based  best  practices, success   stories, supporting
research, and resource links for ongoing professional development and action planning.
Demonstration of the asynchronous panel discussions and other online tools that are part of the suggested professional
development activities.
Presentation of The Knowledge Loom Professional Development Workbook and Facilitator Guide as a companion resource
that leads participants through a series of online and face-to-face collaborative inquiry activities using Knowledge Loom
content.
Unveiling   of the new  content-partner  administrative   interface that allows expert  content   providers (professional  and
technical assistance organizations, government agencies, and individual schools and districts) to make direct submissions of
their content to the Knowledge Loom database.
Audience discussion about the implications of a tool like The Knowledge Loom for effective school change. Sharing ideas
about the expansion of the Workbook into an interactive workspace for both small-group and broadcast knowledge sharing
and decision-making for effective teaching and learning, and discussion about developing an online course focused on the
Workbook activities.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
From October     1998 through   December   2000,   the United  States Department    of Education   assigned  resources  to the
Northeast and Islands Regional Educational Laboratory (LAB), a program of The Education Alliance at Brown University,
to develop a "...sustainable, customer-driven, distributed repository/database of information on best practices in teaching
and learning." After talking to many educators, the LAB realized that a "repository" was not enough. Our vision was The
Knowledge Loom--a comprehensive electronic environment that moves from information delivery to information creation,
from data to people, from a learning library to a learning community. The Knowledge Loom Professional Development
Workbook     and Facilitator Guide  is a continuation  of that work--to   bring the best-practice  content  presented  on  The
Knowledge Loom in a practical way to districts, schools, and classrooms through collaborative professional development
activities.

REFERENCES
Riel, M. (2000) New designs for connected teaching and learning. White paper for the U.S. Department of Education:
         Secretary's Conference on Educational Technology (http://www.gse.uci.edu/mriel/whitepaper/learn4.html).
