Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page 712

    Investigating Physics: An Intimate Look at an Online
                  Inquiry-based Graduate Science Course
                                             Andee Rubin, Sue Doubler
                                                             TERC
                                                        Cambridge, MA
                                                   Andee_Rubin@TERC.edu

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we describe a new online course, Investigating Physics, which is part of an online master's degree in science
education. The course is firmly rooted in the pursuit of scientific inquiry as a pedagogical model and we discuss here what
design issues and solutions arise from this commitment to inquiry and in what ways the course supports the creation of a
learning community that supports and extends students' growth in scientific thinking.
Keywords
Online master's degree, scientific inquiry, investigating physics, learning community
Introduction
Everywhere where we look, there are new online courses, from high school through graduate school. Serious conversation
about important design aspects has proliferated more slowly, however, and the definition of a set of perspectives from
which to analyze online courses has barely begun. This is a difficult task, since educators rarely agree on ways to analyze
face-to-face learning interactions either.
Therefore, it is important that the conversations we have about online courses include pedagogical decisions as well as
decisions about the online structure of the course. We describe here a course whose designers constantly returned to the
pursuit of inquiry as a pedagogical model and, we believe, arrived at some interesting and new ways to think about the
issues that arise when inquiry is the guiding principle of course construction.
Investigating Physics
Investigating Physics is the  third in a   series  of six online courses  that make up   a fully online       master's program for
elementary and middle school teachers in Science Education , developed collaboratively by TERC and Lesley University.
The program seeks to "re-open the door to science" by providing teachers with a safe environment where they can think
hard, work collaboratively, and extend their science understandings. Totaling 33 credit hours, the program helps teachers
increase their knowledge of physics, biology, earth science, engineering and ecology, while exploring new ways to support
their students' science learning. As they develop their own expertise with computer-based technologies, they learn ways to
enhance their students' learning with technology as well.
Creating a course that takes serious a commitment to learning science through inquiry presents many design challenges. In
the Investigating Physics course, as well as the other courses in the program, we have successfully used the following
design features.
The courses   are designed to be solid     science courses, but  written for an audience that has  often      had negative  school
experiences with science. In the case of physics, people's memories were especially painful and some began the courses
quite tentatively. The Investigating Physics course is on forces and motion--especially Newton's Laws. The aim of the
course is for participants to see Newton's Laws in their own everyday actions by taking the perspective of a physicist. To
guide the students' in their scientific thinking, one of the two instructors for the class is a scientist.
Each course is designed with an explicit focus on inquiry as a tool for learning ­ and teaching. This is not a simple task; it is
easy to give lip service to inquiry, but more difficult to ensure that understanding develops through inqury - especially
online. This is where the learning community fostered by the course is most important. As explained in more detail below,
participants' interactions with one another, which are carefully supported by the course structure, are the major place that
understanding unfolds from the investigations carried out by each course participant.
A key aspect of inquiry fostered by the course is first-hand experimentation carried out in course participants' homes. In
Investigating Physics, a kit of materials is mailed to participants before the course begins - it contains a low-friction cart,
several balls, some spring scales - simple materials that cost little and could be used in a classroom as well. Each course
session begins with, first-hand experimenation that demands close observation; participants record their results in their
journals, which then form the basis for their online conversation during the week.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page  713

In each course in the program, there is a dual emphasis: on science and on pedagogy. In the Investigating Physics course,
the pedagogical emphasis is learning how to conduct interviews with children to understand their scientific ideas.
During the course, each student conducts interviews with several children on the same topics they are studying themselves,
and transcribes and analyzes portions of each interview to share with other participants. In order to support this aspect of
the course, there is a second instructor, who is a science educator. Both instructors interact with the students in the various
forums described below.
Video is used in two different and, we have found, highly effective ways. In a more common use, there are video segments
of interviews of the kind they are learning to conduct. These were designed and produced especially for the course. The
other use of video is more unusual. We include short t video clips of motions that take place over too short a time to be
analyzable in normal time. Participants can view these videos in slow motion and can analyze them frame by frame. Most
of the videos in the course are less than one second long. Participants follow the path of objects they are studying by putting
an overhead transparency over the screen and marking the series of positions the object is in as the frames advance. This
creates a trace of the motion of the object and is the basis for many of the participants' discussions
An important   part  of  students' learning  is the study  of  different mathematical  representations       for motion,  some
conventional, others tailor-made   for the medium   in which   they are  working. In many online       courses,  the only thing
participants can share is text. We explicitly gave students the ability to share graphs and other sketches with one another,
using Powerpoint.   This turned out  to be  an  important part of the course, as  sometimes the        only way  students could
communicate their analysis of a motion scenario was through a diagram
Of course, all this takes place in a learning community which is the result of several features of the course. Early in the
course, students are divided into several teams of five or six people. This is their "study group," the students with whom
they will explore the science, share their interviews and offer personal support. Students communicate with one another in
three separate forums. In the Physics Forum, students discuss the data they have collected, their analysis of it and further
questions it evokes. This is where students also share graphs and sketches to illustrate their analysis. In the Learning Forum,
the conversations center on interviews with children, including bits of transcript and analysis. Because all participants ask
similar questions in their interviews, they are able to compare both their interviewing techniques and what they discovered
about the child they interviewed. We added a third forum after the course began: the Motions in your Life Forum, in which
participants describe places in their lives where they find the kind of motions and forces they are studying. There is also a
place to share more personal trials and tribulations and to ask for support: Charlie's Café, named after a "real" café at
Lesley.
We've learned a great deal about designing such a course, and in the process we have generated enough data (i.e. the online
conversations) to keep many Ph.D. Candidates busy for years. We hope this is indeed what happens, since the analysis of
these data can reveal much more about how online courses work.
