Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page 72

          Exploring Foundations for Computer-Supported
                                         Collaborative Learning
                                                       Lasse Lipponen
                                   Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki
                                   P.O. Box 1300014 University of Helsinki, Finland
                                                Lasse.Lipponen@Helsinki.Fi
                                      Tel. +358-9-19123772 fax: +358-9-19123443

ABSTRACT
In 1996 Koschmann (1996) suggested computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) as an emerging paradigm of
educational technology. After six years, how has the field developed? What does research say about CSCL to date? What is
the state of the art? The aim of the present paper is to explore the foundations for CSCL, and in doing so, to contribute to
the theoretical as well as empirical understanding and development of CSCL research.

Keywords:
Collaboration, collaborative technology, learning theories

INTRODUCTION:               WHAT         IS  COMPUTER-SUPPORTED                     COLLABORATIVE                  LEARNING
(CSCL)?
       In     1996     Koschmann   (1996)   recognized  computer-supported     collaborative learning   (CSCL)     as an  emerging
paradigm of educational technology. According to Koschmann (1996), CSCL research is grounded on a very different
concept of learning, pedagogy, research methodology, and research questions than its antecedents, CAI (Computer Assisted
Instruction), ITS   (Intelligent   Tutoring Systems),  and,  Logo-as-Latin   did. But  now   after six  years, how    has the  field
developed? What does research say about CSCL to date? What is the state of the art?
       Throughout history, our conceptions about human cognition and learning have been related and shaped by the
development of technology (Bolter, 1984). This parallelism between our psychological understanding and the technologies
available is clear in the field of computer-supported collaborative learning, where technology meets psychology, philosophy
and  pedagogy.  Instructional    designers  and software   developers, educational  psychologists,    learning theorists, computer
scientists, and even sociologists are interested in this rather new area of research.
       It is hard to say when CSCL emerged as a separate field of study, or as an emerging paradigm of educational
technology. The first CSCL workshop took place in 1990 (Koschmann, 1994), and the first international CSCL conference
was  held 1995      in Bloomington,   Indiana.  However,   O'Malley    and Scanlon  already  used  the  term   computer-supported
collaborative learning in 1989 (O'Malley & Scanlon, 1989). Partly, the inspiration for CSCL arose from the research on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). This research has revealed issues about the collaborative nature of work
supported by groupware (Galegher, Kraut, & Egido, 1990; Greenberg, 1991) Thus, in a sense, CSCL is the younger sibling
of CSCW.
       How     should     one define  computer-supported     collaborative  learning?  Put   briefly, CSCL     is focused  on  how
collaborative learning supported by technology can enhance peer interaction and work in groups, and how collaboration and
technology facilitate sharing and distributing of knowledge and expertise among community members. Whilst talking about
computer-supported collaborative learning one typically refers to the acronym CSCL, and does not speculate about the latter
"C" word (the first stands for 'computer') and what it might stand for. The short history of CSCL shows, however, that there
have been  different     interpretations and   suggestions  for the  "C"   word   such as, collective  (Pea,   1996),  coordinated,
cooperative and collaborative (see Koschmann, 1994). There have been even different interpretations of the meaning of the
whole acronym. The latest, computer support for collaboration and learning, pointed out by Koschmann (1999), suggests
that we should link research on learning and working more closely to each other, as well as the research on the CSCL and
CSCW.  Despite      the  different interpretations of the  "C"  word   and the acronym,    most  researchers   appear  to use them
nowadays as already suggested by Koschmann in 1994. He proposed "the best policy might be to simply use the acronym,
allowing individual interpretation of what the letters might be (1994, p.220).
       At     first glance, the  speculation   about  the meaning   of the "C"  word   and   the acronym   might    look  somewhat
meaningless.   This    conversation  is,  however,   related to  the central   questions concerning    CSCL    such   as,  What  is
collaboration, What are we studying when we are studying collaboration supported by technology, and, What should we be
studying?
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page 73

Concepts and Theories underlying CSCL research

Concepts of collaboration
        When referring to collaboration, about what is one actually speaking? To put it simply, in the public conversation
the term 'collaboration' appears to refer to any activities that a pair of individuals, or a group of people perform together.
Among researchers, however, including those in academic fields, the term 'collaboration' is understood rather differently.
Within learning sciences, common to the different definitions of collaboration is that they stress the idea of co construction
of knowledge and mutual engagement of participants. In this sense, collaboration can be considered as a special form of
interaction. Rochelle and Teasley (1995) for instance, stressed the role of shared understanding, and wrote that collaboration
is "a coordinated,   synchronous    activity that  is the  result   of a continued attempt    to  construct and maintain  a shared
conception of a problem" (p. 70). Or consider Crook (1994) who offers an intriguing perspective on collaboration. He holds
that there is a developmental line from children's secondary intersubjectivity and symbolic play to sophisticated reciprocal
understanding and shared knowledge. In children's symbolic play, the material world plays a crucial role in coordination of
play activities and in creating a shared framework for collaboration. Most theories or approaches to collaboration neglect the
impact  and   possibilities  of the material    world for  facilitating  mutual  understanding    and shared  goals.  However,  the
management    of   the material  world   offers rich  referential anchors  for  monitoring    grounding and   mutual understanding.
Computers, especially, can offer a rich repertoire of referential anchors, and points of shared reference (e.g. simulation on a
screen). According to Crook (1998), there are three features of interaction that are central to successful collaboration:
intimacy among participants, rich supply of external resources, such as computers, and histories of joint activity of those
interacting. Further,   Engeström    (1992)  has   elaborated     a three-level notion   of   developmental   forms  of interaction;
coordination, cooperation, and reflective communication. On the level of coordination each actor concentrates and performs
his or her own role and actions, which are scripted or predetermined. In 'cooperative' interactions, says Engeström, actors
focus on a shared problem, trying to find mutually acceptable ways to conceptualize it. This level corresponds to the
definition of collaboration (although Engeström uses the concept, `cooperation'), just given, above, from Roschelle and
Teasley (1995). The third form of interaction elaborated by Engeström is reflective communication, in which the actors
focus on reconceptualizing their own interaction system in relation to their shared objects of activity; both, the objects and
the scripts are reconceptualized. Only through this expansive cycle, is the interaction system transformed, and new motives
and objects for collaborative activity created. The advance of this model is that it tries to explain how new forms of
collaborative activities are created. According to Engeström (1992), these three phases are a natural cycle of any genuine
learning activity.
        There exist also broader definitions of collaboration than those referring to a special type of interaction, such as
stressing the mutual engagement of the parties (in fact, Engeström's third definition, reflective communication, could also
be considered as "participating in activity system", and thus, representing broader definition of collaboration than just
stressing the mutual engagement). Collaboration can be defined as a process of participating in knowledge communities. As
pointed out   by   Brufee   (1993,  p.3) collaboration  is  "a reculturative    process  that helps  students become    members of
knowledge communities whose common property is different from the common property of the knowledge communities
they  already belong    to". Scardamalia    and  Bereiter  (1994)    speak about  knowledge-building     communities.   Knowledge
building is a special form of collaborative activity oriented towards the development of conceptual artifacts, and towards the
development of collective understanding. In a community of learners, as proposed by Brown and Campione (1994), the core
activity is participation in collaborative process of sharing and distributing expertise. As stated by Brown (1994, p. 10),
"Learning and teaching depend on creating, sustaining, and expanding a community of research practice. Members of the
community are critically dependent on each other. No one is an island; no one knows it all; collaborative learning is not just
nice, it is necessary for survival". The idea that collaboration is a basic form of human activity, essential for cultural
development, is stressed intensively by many writers throughout the history of psychology (Bruner; 1996; Engeström, 1987;
Hutchins, 1995; Mead, 1934; Tomasello, 1999; Vygotsky, 1962; 1978; Wundt, 1921).
        In sum, even this very short look to the definitions of collaboration has shown how difficult it is to find a total
consensus in this issue, although both approaches, collaboration as a special form of interaction, and collaboration as a
process of participation in collective activities ("working together"), include the idea of achieving shared goals. One may
ask whether we even need an agreed interpretation of collaboration, or should we just accept the diversity, and let the future
determine which definitions will survive. It appears that we can--that perhaps we must--analyze collaborative activities on
both micro and macro levels, and, as proposed by Dillenbourg (1999), concern ourselves with aspects such as situation,
interactions, processes, and effects.
Theories of collaboration
        Whether one considers collaboration as a special form of interaction or as a process of participation, traces back to
the conversation   of  two   metaphors   of learning,  acquisition   and  participation, or   on the debate  between  the cognitive
perspective  and   the situative perspective    of learning (Anderson,    Greeno,  Reder,     &  Simon, 2000;  Sfard, 1998).Within
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                     page    74

acquisition metaphor learning is a matter of construction, acquisition, and outcomes, which are realized in the process of
transfer. Within   the  participation metaphor     cognition and   knowledge  are   distributed  over   both  individuals    and  their
environments, and learning is "located" in these relations and networks of distributed activities of participation. Learning
and collaboration    are not only   a matter  of epistemology    but  also a  matter of ontology.    Knowledge      is not  all that  is
constructed   but  also  humans  and   their identities are  constructions;  learning is  also  a matter    of personal     and  social
transformation (Packer & Goicoechea, 2000). This ontological line of research should be considered also more in the CSCL
research .
          Whether    relying on  the  acquisition  or  participation  metaphor   of  learning,  there   exist two   main    theoretical
perspectives for a mechanism promoting learning in a CSCL setting. These perspectives, which seem to be agreed among
researchers, trace back to the thinking of Piaget and Vygotsky. The first mechanism that is seen to promote learning in the
context of CSCL is Piagetian socio-cognitive conflict. Children on different levels of cognitive development, or children on
the same    level of cognitive  development     with  differing perspectives, can   engage   in social  interaction    that leads  to   a
cognitive conflict. This "shock of our thought coming into contact with others" (Piaget, 1928, p. 204) may create a state of
disequilibrium within participants, resulting to construction of new conceptual structures and understanding. According to
this view, new knowledge is not so much a product of co-construction or shared understanding but is rather understood as
taking place in the individual minds. This new understanding can then be brought back to the level of social interaction, and
collaborative activities. Another interpretation of Piaget's theory stresses more the idea of co-construction of knowledge and
mutual understanding. The co-construction of knowledge takes place through one's increasing ability to take account of
other peoples' perspectives. This ability develops through five, distinct, developmental stages; from an undifferentiated and
egocentric social perspective to in-depth and societal-symbolic perspective taking (Selman, 1980; Järvelä & Häkkinen, in
press).
          The second well-known mechanism for promoting learning in context of social interaction is formulated on the
basis of Vygotsky's ideas. There are two basic interpretations of Vygotsky's thought. The first, and the more traditional
view, assumes that because of engagement in collaborative activities, individuals can master something they could not do
before  the  collaboration.  People  gain  knowledge    and  practice some   new competencies     as  a result of   internalization   in
collaborative learning. In other words, collaboration is interpreted as a facilitator of individual cognitive development. The
other interpretation of Vygotsky's ideas emphasizes the role of mutual engagement and co-construction of knowledge.
According to this perspective, learning is more as a matter of participation in a social process of knowledge construction
than an individual endeavor. Knowledge emerges through the network of interactions and is distributed and mediated among
those (humans and tools) interacting (Cole and Wertsch, 1996).
          Influenced by Piaget and Vygotsky, a great variety of research goes under the label of CSCL covering many, even
very different instructional and theoretical approaches, that aim to support individual and group learning with technology. In
many cases the theories of Piaget and Vygotsky are seen to represent opposite explanations of human development and
learning. In the future, a fruitful approach might be to attempt to reconcile these two perspectives (Hickey & McCaslin, in
press; Packer & Goicoechea, 2000).

Empirical research on CSCL
          Whilst the antecedents educational technology paradigms relied strongly on experimental research design, CSCL
adopts  a  variety of  methods   from  the fields  of  anthropology,  communication     science,  and   linguistic  research,   just to
mention    a few.  Typical   methods   for analysis   are  ethnographical   methods   and  discourse    analysis   with  descriptive,
observational,   and  non-experimental    data. Stress  is put  on the  ecological  validity of  the  research.  In    contrast to   its
predecessors that studied human cognition with experimental design and in laboratories, CSCL research is conducted also
in "real world contexts", for instance, at schools.
        What then should researchers study in the context of CSCL? Some researchers propose that we should study very
specific interactions of mutual engagement and intimacy. Dillenbourg (1999) suggested that one should not talk about the
effects of collaborative learning in general but more specifically about the effects of particular categories of interactions.
One should, for example, analyze a posteriori which interactions did actually take place during collaboration (Dillenbourg,
1999, pp. 16-17), for instance, to study the sequences of improvement and refinement of ideas, and focus not so much on
individual statements in discourse (Stahl, in press). In other words, one should in collaborative interactions zoom in more
intensively on the micro level.
          If one studies only interactions of mutual engagement one can then ask, what is the relevance of CSCL research at
schools, or in workplaces in general. The dilemma is this: if collaboration is understood as "a coordinated, synchronous
activity that is the result of a continued attempt to construct and maintain a shared conception of a problem" (Roschelle &
Teasley, 1995, p. 70), it refers to a form of interaction that can be, strictly speaking, maintained only among a small number
of  people,  and  perhaps,  only in   face-to-face situations.  An approach   to collaboration   solely  in   terms of  face  to  face
encounters among small groups appears, however, to be very limited approach to CSCL, for it is very common to speak
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                             page 75

about collaboration and learning communities in the same context, and related to networked learning environments. As
pointed out earlier, collaboration can also considered as a process of participating in practices of a community.
         How then, should one speak about and analyze collaboration at the collective (macro) level? One idea would be to
think about communities as interaction networks, and interactions representing strong and weak links among participants.
Links among community members that frequently meet each other are usually strong, and conversely (see Granovetter,
1973). We may assume that strong links and intensive interaction among community members also represent intensive and
productive collaboration. Thus, as pointed out by Wellman and others (Wellman, Salaff, Dimitrova, Garton, Gulia, &
Haythornthwaite, 2000), we could speak about computer-supported social networks. Or the unit of analysis could be an
activity system, as proposed by Engeström (1987). To date, there is no consensus about the unit of analysis, whether it
should be individuals, dyads, groups, communities, or as argued by Bereiter (in press), collaboratively produced knowledge
objects or conceptual artifacts. All these units of analysis have been, individually, used in the studies that go under the label
CSCL, the unit of analysis depending on the theoretical background and definitions of 'collaboration' used.
         It is a challenging task to compare empirical studies conducted under the label CSCL, because they differ from
each other in several significant aspects. First of all, there is no agreement whether one should study effects of or effects
with CSCL. In 1991, Salomon, Perkins, and Globerson made educators aware of two ways of thinking about learning and
technology. According to them, one should look at effects of technology, this is, what one has learned and can transfer from
those situation working with computer. Yet one should also look at the effects with technology; what one could achieve in
synergy with a computer. In the same sense one can speak about effects of CSCL; that is, as a result of interacting with
others and computers, persons individually practice new competencies and gain knowledge that can be transfer to new
situations. Or, by contrast, one may speak of effects with CSCL, referring to processes people and computers achieve in
synergy.
         Secondly, there is a variation in research procedures; in length of the study, in number of students participating, in
students' age, and whether students worked individually, in pairs, or in small groups. Whilst analyzing learning in CSCL
settings, researchers have used different learning tasks, and have studied how special concepts are learned (Roschelle,
1992). They have analyzed sociocognitive effects of CSCL (Järvelä, Hakkarainen, Lehtinen, & Lipponen, 2000), complex
reasoning and levels of argumentation (Hoadley & Linn, 2000), explored science learning and inquiry processes (Edelson,
Gordin,  &  Pea, 1999;  Lipponen   &   Hakkarainen, 1997;  Hakkarainen,   Lipponen,   &  Järvelä,  in press),     collaborative
knowledge   building (Lipponen,  2000;   Scardamalia, Bereiter,   &  Lamon, 1994),   studied cognitive  and   metacognitive
understanding  (Brown, Ellery   &  Campione,  1998),  design processes   (Seitamaa-Hakkarainen,    Raami,   Muukkonen,     &
Hakkarainen, in press), and motivational aspects in CSCL (Hakkarainen, Lipponen, Järvelä, & Niemivirta, 1999). Lately,
stress is also put on issues of participation (Guzdial & Turns, 2000; Lipponen, Rahikainen, Hakkarainen, & Palonen, 2001).
These are just few of the research topics that have emerged in the context of CSCL.
         Thirdly, what makes the comparison even more difficult among different studies is that there exists a great variety
in the technologies  used; also in the purposes sought,  and how     some particular applications  were used:     Is students'
collaboration supported around the computer (for instance, with simulation programs), or is it supported with networked
learning environments, and is technology used for structuring the collaboration or to mediate collaboration (see, Hall,
Miyake, & Enyedy, 1997; Hoadley, 1999; Dillenbourg, Eurelings, & Hakkarainen, 2001). There has already been mention
of the differences in methodologies and units of analysis applied
         The boundless enthusiasm towards technology has made us researchers mainly focus on the potentials of CSCL. In
some respects, this has blinded us, and made us to consider the potentials of technology and collaboration as empirical
evidence for the actual benefits of CSCL. It is true, that some very intensive studies have had success in promoting high-
quality learning supported with computer networks (Hakkarainen, 1998; Scardamalia, et al., 1994). But, on a large scale,
there is no solid evidence that collaboration through networks leads to excellent learning results. Stahl (in press) has even
proposed  that CSCL   environments   are mainly  used  for exchange    of personal   opinions, and for  delivering    surface
knowledge, not for collaborative knowledge building. In addition, we can also speculate whether some of these results
achieved in the  CSCL   studies  would   have been  achieved  without   any networked   computer   support.   Among     other
constraints on the dominant research in CSCL is that there exists little research on how students participate in networked
mediated collaboration, and on the consequences of different types of participation patterns, and how are these related to
other aspects of CSCL, such as quality of students' discourse (but see Lipponen et al., 2001). As a consequence of the
ambiguity (or richness if you will) of the empirical studies in the CSCL research, it is difficult to integrate the empirical
studies and findings or to make any solid conclusions that some particular approach, instructional method, or application
would give better results than some others. One does not know exactly the circumstances in which one set of results can be
extended to another context.

Challenges and Advantages of CSCL
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page  76

          Collaboration can be supported with very different instructional ideas and computer applications. Crook (1994), for
instance, has  proposed    four kinds of  interaction in  which  computers  play  a  part: 1) interactions   at the   computers, 2)
interactions around computers, 3) interactions related to computer applications, and 4) interactions through computers. In
the following paragraphs, I concentrate on the fourth issue, interaction and collaboration through computers.
          The first three aspects proposed by Crook are face-to-face interaction situations where meanings are mediated
through spoken language, faces, and gestures. In these situations, computers can act as a referential anchor, and mediate the
coordination of attention and collaborative actions (Järvelä, Bonk, Lehtinen, & Lehti, 1999; Roschelle, 1992). By contrast,
collaboration through networked learning environments is still mainly based on written language. Thus, interaction taking
place through   computer    networks  lacks certain   basic features of face-to-face collaboration:   social cues   such as  faces,
gestures and intonations of speech. It also lacks the rich referential field of the material world that is present in face-to-face
interactions. The lack of referential anchors is quite pronounced in written communication. This means that explicating
referential relations in a written message is important because, in written language, such explications of a message create
context and grounding; in contrast these referents are usually known by participants or are easily checked in face-to-face
discourse. Building a common ground is considered an essential part of coordinating collaborative activities and knowledge
sharing (Clark & Brennan, 1991).
          The idea of collaboration as mutual engagement appears to imply synchronous activity or even a situation of face-
to-face interaction. Hence, one may ask, how is this prerequisite for collaboration, mutual and reciprocal engagement,
created through networked learning environments, or is it possible at all? There are some initial attempts to analyze this
phenomenon in asynchronous CSCL environments (see Järvelä & Häkkinen, in press) but there is still a lack of evidence
whether asynchronous computer-mediated collaboration is possible at all, and if it were, what expressions or communicative
acts  would  be    indicators of reciprocal interaction   and  understanding.   From  this  perspective   one   can   presume  that
collaboration is a form of activity that seldom manifests in students' interactions in networked learning environments.
          There  are  other   challenges of CSCL:     knowledge   management     problems   with large  databases,    fact-oriented
knowledge construction, short discussion threads with divergence topics, and unequal participation patterns (Guzdial &
Turns, 2000; Lipponen et. al., 2001; Lipponen, Rahikainen, Lallimo, & Hakkarainen, 2001). According to Stahl (1999), the
clearest  failures related to  computer-supported   collaborative learning  environments    are  that for different   personal and
cultural reasons, students and teachers are hesitant to use them. Further, if the technology itself is put intensively into use,
there still might be considerable difficulties in bringing about genuine collaboration and knowledge construction.
          Why has CSCL been so slowly adopted? As proposed by Kling (1991) in the context of CSCW, it might be that the
meanings attached to collaboration are too positively loaded, or the collaborative settings are interpreted too narrowly
referring only to positive phenomenon. This may restrict one from seeing that collaborative situations are also full of
contradictions,  competition,    and conflicts. A   realistic picture of collaboration    should also   take    these issues in  to
consideration.  Only  recently   has the  interest in overcoming   the  existing barriers  of computer-supported      collaborative
learning grown (Lipponen, 1999; Stahl, 1999).
          On the   other hand,   technology offers  the kind  of potentials for  learning  which are  very   different  from those
available in other contexts. A wave of empirical research has revealed a long list of the promises and reported benefits of
computer   networks   for  collaboration  (see  Lehtinen,   Hakkarainen, Lipponen,   Rahikainen,  &    Muukkonen,      1999, for  a
review). One self-evident benefit is, that computer networks break down the physical and temporal barriers of schooling by
removing time and space constraints. The delay of asynchronous communication allows time for reflection in interaction.
Making thinking visible by writing should help students to reflect on their own and others' ideas and share their expertise.
Shared discourse spaces and distributed interaction can offer multiple perspectives and zones of proximal development
(ZPD) for students with varying knowledge and competencies. CSCL environments can also offer greater opportunities to
share and solicit knowledge. Further, the database can function as a collective memory for a learning community, storing the
history of knowledge construction processes for revisions and future use.

Technology for collaboration
          At present, the current understanding appears to be that collaboration is a synonym for good learning and good
educational technology; almost any web-based application is labeled as 'collaborative.' This loose usage is also because
there is no established way to classify the variety of tools that might be considered as collaborative, and moreover, because
almost any technological application, could, in some way, be used in support of collaboration, i.e., by people working
together on something.
          Hence, it might be meaningful to make a distinction between collaborative use of technology and collaborative
technology. Imagine a pair of students working at the computer running a simulation program in physics. The simulations
on the screen can help the students to collaborate, by creating a referential anchor, a point of shared reference (Crook,
1994). This referential anchor can function as a "concrete" shared representation, can support the negotiation of meanings,
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   77

and mediate students'     communication activities in their development   of reciprocal understanding    (Hakkarainen, et al.,
1998; Järvelä, et. al., 1999). In this case, the technology, the software developed for the individual user, is utilized in
creating and establishing
collaborative activities.
       On the other hand, collaboration can be supported through computer networks, but not (without special efforts)
those most well-known on the Internet. As stated by Roschelle and Pea (1999), most of the Internet tools and discussion
forums available are not robust and simple enough for use in average classrooms, or do not translate to the classroom
setting. Typical Internet chat or bulletin board systems or e-mail do not organize conversations well for learning. These
applications are not, in the first place, designed for pedagogical purposes of building collaborative knowledge. However,
with advanced pedagogical practices, these applications can also be utilized for collaborative learning.
       The most pure and original applications of CSCL and collaborative technology are, perhaps, networked learning
environments (or 'groupware'), such as CSILE (Computer Supported Intentional Learning Environment, see Scardamalia &
Bereiter, 1994), which are designed especially for educational use and for collaborative knowledge building. A common
feature of advanced network applications designed for educational purposes is that they support users' cognitive activities
by providing advanced socio-cognitive scaffolding, by offering many ways to structure discussion to create collaborative
representations and by including community-building tools. "These tools all scaffold learning by prestructuring the kinds of
contributions learners can make, supporting meaningful relationships among those contributions, and guiding students'
browsing on the basis of socio-cognitive principle" (Pea, Tinker, Linn, Means, Brandsford, Roschelle, Hsi, Brophy, &
Songer 1999, p. 33). Even if there exists a body of research with respect to CSCL applications, there is one crucial thing to
remember. With respect to learning results, it is very hard to find solid evidence that some particular CSCL application is
better than some other or better than some traditional classroom uses of computers.
       Technology itself does not solve the challenges of learning and collaboration. For collaborative technology can, of
course, be used for other purposes than for supporting collaboration; it can easily be applied in transmitting and delivering
knowledge. An important part of the use of collaborative technology is how the technology is implemented, for instance, in
school setting. Among the issues for which there is still a lack of good research data are the following: Is it possible to
implement CSCL without already having a deep understanding of collaborative learning and collaborative technology? Or
is it possible to introduce new ideas of learning and human cognition with new technology? These are among the most
important questions to respond if CSCL if going to work on a large scale.

IMPLEMENTATION               OF  CSCL:      FROM        TECHNICAL            INFRASTRUCTURE                TO    SOCIAL
INFRASTRUCTURE
       One of the major challenges of CSCL, or educational technology in general, is scaling-up; how to expand and
implement the good practices that researcher and teachers have found and developed. In other words, what is needed in
successful implementation of technology? Although technology, in some cases, may act as a "Trojan Mouse" (Papert, 1993)
and serve as a catalyst for change, nowadays it seems very clear that technology itself does not necessarily make any deep
changes in learning activities in school. Whilst creating new learning environments or learning communities, it is not just a
matter of implementing and putting into use new technology but in many cases, also applying simultaneously new practices
of learning and instruction.
       In 1999 I proposed (Lipponen, 1999) that we should pay more attention to the factors that inhibit or support the
implementation and use of CSCL at schools. To successfully implement and use CSCL in natural settings, one has to
resolve technical, organizational, and pedagogical challenges. Bielaczyc (2001) has presented a parallel idea. According to
her, one of the key factors in successful implementation of CSCL is to build an appropriate social infrastructure around the
technical infrastructure. She proposed three levels of social infrastructure important for successful implementation and use
of CSCL. These three include, cultural level (the philosophy and norms established among educators and students), activity
level (practices), and tool level (technology). Thus, instead of focusing extensively on the technology, one should turn
towards thinking about the social settings that support the implementation and use of technology.
       Bielaczyc is right on the mark, but only partly. Namely, her model still appears to be slightly technology driven for
it implies that the social infrastructure should be built around the technology; implicitly, the technological infrastructure
appears to be the primary structure that is supported by some special social activities. I propose that we have two other
advanced possibilities to think about this issue. First, one could explore and find the advanced and innovative pedagogical
practices (or needs) that already exist in the particular context that aims to take technology in use. While these practices and
activities are found, technology could be implemented to support and extend these already existing, good practices. In this
case, the social infrastructure is primary to the technical infrastructure. An even more advanced idea would be to find the
zone of proximal development of the particular community and to implement technology that has the potential to help to
transform the community      towards more advanced    learning activities through an expansive learning    cycle (Engeström,
1987). The third alternative is that technological and social infrastructure co-evolve. This is what happens, of course, in the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                          page  78

two previous alternatives too. But what I propose, is that the idea of co-evolution should be the starting point for thinking
about implementing technology and new forms of learning activities. This approach is very much pedagogy and activity
driven. It implies that technology should be very flexible and tailorable. Learners are not the same as the everyday people or
experts, but need software designed especially for the learners. As far as I can see, the concept of social infrastructure has
the potential to help us to think about the problems of implementing technology and building learning communities, and
should be carefully studied in the future. There is one more thing to consider concerning infrastructures. Perhaps, as stated
by Crook (1994), classrooms are still too neatly resourced for successful collaboration, and the material world is too often
underestimated in  building   collaboration; material  objects  offer points of shared reference  for developing    genuine
collaborative interactions.

CONCLUSIONS
       In sum, even if the stress in CSCL research is on socially-oriented theories of learning, descriptive, observational,
and non-experimental data, and methods from the fields of anthropology, communication science, and linguistic research,
there is still no unifying and established theoretical framework, no agreed objects of study, no methodological consensus, or
agreement about the concept of collaboration, or unit of analysis. Positively considered, this ambiguity can be seen as
reflecting the richness or diversity of the field. Negatively interpreted, it seems that the field is proceeding along more and
more divergent lines. If we concur that in an established scientific paradigm, the theories and methods as well as objects of
study are agreed, it is not an exaggeration to say that CSCL is an emerging educational technology paradigm. Perhaps, as
suggested by  Hall (2001),   researchers in  the learning sciences  should pay more attention to characterizing  their work
practices (their theory and method), that is, how to do this kind of research. According to Hall (2001), such efforts are
important, for such efforts would help clarify how they theorize and investigate cognition, learning, and teaching, and teach
newcomers how to do research.
       I share the idea that appears on the homepage of the CSCL 2002 conference (http://www.cscl2002.org/intro.html):
" ... further progress is needed to provide a solid foundation for CSCL as a robust, effective research field. We [CSCL
researchers] need to start to coalesce and strengthen a set of coherent foundations --without imposing a narrow approach or
stifling the healthy interchange of conflicting interdisciplinary perspectives". This task is absolutely worthwhile of striving
for. But as my exploration showed, it will also be a very demanding task, it might be even a mission impossible.

REFERENCES
Anderson, J. R. Greeno, J. G., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. (2000). Perspectives on Learning, Thinking, and Activity.
       Educational Researcher, 29, 11-13.
Bereiter, B. (in press). Education and mind in the knowledge age. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bielaczyc, K. (2001). Designing social infrastructure: The challenge of building computer-supported learning communities.
       In  P.  Dillenbourg,   A.  Eurelings, &    K. Hakkarainen   (Eds.), European perspectives  on  computer-supported
       collaborative learning. The proceedings of the First European Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative
       Learning (pp.106-114). University of Maastricht.
Bolter, J. D. (1984). Turing's man: western culture in the computer age. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina
       Press.
Brown, A. L. (1994). The advancement of learning. Educational Researcher, 23, 4-12.
Brown, A. L. & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom
       lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229-270). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brown, A. L., Ellery, S., & Campione, J. C. (1998). Creating zones of proximal development electronically. In J. G. Greeno
       & S. V. Goldman (Eds.), Thinking practices in mathematics and science learning (pp.341-367). Mahwah, NJ:
       Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brufee, K. (1993). Collaborative learning. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bruner, J.S. (1996). Culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D. Teasley
       (Eds.), Perspectives    on socially   shared  cognition (pp. 127-149).  Washington, DC:   American  Psychological
       Association.
Cole, M., & Wertsch, J. V. (1996). Beyond the individual-social antinomy in discussions of Piaget and Vygotsky. Human
       Development, 39, 250-256.
Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the collaborative experience of learning. London: Routledge.
Crook, C. (1998). Children as computer users: the case of collaborative learning. Computers and Education, 30, 237- 247.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page 79

Dillenbourg, P.   (1999). Introduction:  What    do  you    mean    by "collaborative  learning"?   In P.  Dillenbourg  (Ed.),
         Collaborative Learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 1-19) Amsterdam: Pergamon, Elsevier
         Science.
Dillenbourg, P.,  Eurelings, A.,  &  Hakkarainen,      K.   (Eds.). (2001).  European  perspectives    on computer-supported
         collaborative learning. The proceedings of the First European Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative
         Learning. University of Maastricht.
Doise, W., & Mugny, G. (1984). The social development of the intellect. Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Edelson, D.  C.,  Gordin, D.  N., &  Pea,   R.  D.  (1999).  Addressing   the  challenges of   inquiry-based learning through
         technology and curriculum design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 391-450.
Engeström,  Y.  (1987). Learning  by expanding.     An activity-theoretical  approach  to developmental    research. Helsinki:
         Orienta-Konsultit Oy.
Engeström, Y. (1992). Interactive expertise. Studies in distributed working intelligence. Research bulletin 83, department of
         education, University of Helsinki.
Galegher, J. & R. Kraut, E. & Egido, C. (Eds.) (1990), Intellectual teamwork: Social and technological foundations of
         cooperative work (pp. 1-20). Hilsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Greenberg, S. (Ed.). (1991). Computer-supported cooperative work and Groupware. New York: Academic Press.
Guzdial, M., & Turns, J. (2000). Effective Discussion Through a Computer-Mediated Anchored Forum. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences, 9, 437- 469.
Granovetter, M. (1973). The Strength of Weak Ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78, 1360-1380.
Hakkarainen  (1998).  Epistemology   of  scientific inquiry   in    computer-supported   collaborative learning.   Unpublished
         doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto.
Hakkarainen, K., Järvelä, S., Lipponen, L., & Lehtinen, E. (1998). Culture of collaboration in computer-supported learning:
         Finnish perspectives. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 9, 271-287.
Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., & Järvelä, S. (in press). Epistemology of inquiry and computer-supported collaborative
         learning. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall, & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL2: Carrying Forward the Conversation. Mahwah,
         NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Hakkarainen, K.,  Lipponen,  L.,  Järvelä, S., &  Niemivirta,   M.   (1999). The  interaction  of motivational orientation and
         knowledge-seeking   inquiry in  computer-supported      collaborative learning.  Journal  of  Educational Computing
         Research, 3, 261-279.
Hall, R. (2001). Schedules of practical work for the analysis of case studies of learning and development. Journal of the
         Learning Sciences 10, 203­222.
Hall, R., Miyake, N., & Enyedy, N. (Ed.). (1997). Proceedings of CSCL '97: The Second International Conference on
         Computer Support for Collaborative Learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Hickey, D. T., & McCaslin, M. (in press). A comparative, sociocultural analysis of context and motivation. In S. Volet and
         S. Järvelä (Eds.), Motivation in learning contexts: Theoretical and Methodological implications. A volume in the
         EARLI/Pergamon "Advances in Learning and Instruction" series.
Hoadley, C.  (Ed.). (1999).  Proceedings    of CSCL    '99: The  Third  International Conference    on Computer    Support for
         Collaborative Learning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hoadley, C.,  &   Linn, M.  (2000).  Teaching   science   through   online,  peer discussions: SpeakEasy   in  the Knowledge
         Intergration Environment. Journal of Science Teaching, 22, 839-857.
Järvelä, S., Bonk, C.J., Lehtinen, E. & Lehti, S. (1999). A theoretical analysis of social interactions in computer-based
         learning environments: Evidence for reciprocal understandings. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 21,
         359-384.
Järvelä, S., Hakkarainen, K., Lehtinen, E. & Lipponen, L. (2000). Creating Computer-supported Collaborative Learning
         (CSCL) Culture in Finnish Schools: Research Perspectives on Sociocognitive Effects. International Journal of
         Continuing Engineering Education and Life-Long Learning, 10, 1-10.
Järvelä, S., & Häkkinen, P. (in press). The levels of web-based discussions using perspective-taking theory as an analysis
         tool. In H. van Oostendorp (Ed.), Cognition in a digital world. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kling, R. (1991). Cooperation, coordination and control in computer-supported work. Communications of the ACM, 34, 12,
         83-88.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                         page  80

Koschman, T. (1994). Toward a theory of computer support for collaborative learning. Journal of the learning sciences, 3,
        219-225.
Koschmann, T. (1996). Paradigm shifts and instructional technology: An introduction. In T. Koschmann, (Ed.), CSCL:
        Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm, (pp. 1-23). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Koschmann, T. (1999). Computer support for collaboration and learning. Journal of the learning sciences, 8, 495-497.
Lehtinen, E., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., & Muukkonen, H. (1999). Computer-supported collaborative
        learning: A review of research and development (The J.H.G.I Giesbers Reports on Education, 10). Netherlands:
        University of Nijmegen, Department of Educational Sciences.
Lipponen, L. (1999). Challenges for computer-supported collaborative learning in elementary and secondary level: Finnish
        perspective. In C. Hoadley (Ed.), Proceedings of CSCL '99: The Third International Conference on Computer
        Support for Collaborative Learning (pp. 368-375). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lipponen, L. (2000). Towards knowledge building discourse: From facts to explanations in primary students' computer
        mediated discourse. Learning Environments Research, 3, 179-199.
Lipponen, L., & Hakkarainen, K. (1997). Developing culture of inquiry in computer-supported collaborative learning. In R.
        Hall, N.   Miyake,  &  N. Enyedy   (Ed.), Proceedings   of CSCL  '97:    The Second  International  Conference  on
        Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (pp. 164-168). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., Hakkarainen, K., & Palonen, T. (2001). Effective participation and discourse through a
        computer network:Investigating elementary students' computer-supported interaction. Manuscript submitted for
        publication.
Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M., Lallimo, J., & Hakkarainen, K. (2001). Analyzing patterns of participation and discourse in
        elementary   students' online  science discussion. In  P.  Dillenbourg,  A.  Eurelings, &  K.  Hakkarainen  (Eds.),
        European perspectives on computer-supported collaborative learning. The proceedings of the First European
        Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 421-428). University of Maastricht.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self, and society. Chicago: University Chicago Press.
O'Malley, C. & Scanlon, E. (1989). Computer-supported collaborative learning: Problem solving and distance education.
        Centre for Information Technology in Education. Report No. 75. Open University, Great Britain.
Packer, M.   J., &  Goicoechea,   J. (2000). Sociocultural  and   constructivist theories of learning: Ontology, not   just
        epistemology. Educational Psychologist, 35, 227-241.
Papert, S. (1993). The children's machine: rethinking school in the age of the Computer. New York: Basic Books.
Pea, R. D. (1996).   Seeing what  we   build together. Distributed  multimedia   learning environments  for transformative
        learning. In T. Koschmann, (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp.171-186) Mahwah,
        NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pea, R., Tinker, R., Linn, M., Means, Brandsford, J. Roschelle, J., Hsi, S., Brophy, S., & Songer, N. (1999). Toward a
        learning technologies knowledge network. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47, 19-38.
Piaget, J. (1928). The judgement and reasoning in children. London: Routledge and Kegan.
Roschelle, J. (1992). Learning by collaborating: convergent conceptual change. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2,
        235-276.
Roschelle, J., & Pea, R. (1999). Trajectories from today's WWW to a powerful educational infrastructure. Educational
        Researcher, 43, 22-25.
Salomon, G., Perkins, D., & Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition: Extending human intelligence with intelligent
        technologies, Educational Researcher, 20, 9-20.
Scardamalia,  M.,  & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer     support for knowledge-building     communities. The  Journal of the
        Learning Sciences, 3, 265-283.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C. & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring the classroom into World 3. In K.
        McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons; Integrating cognitive theory & classroom practice (pp. 201-228). Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press.
Seitamaa-Hakkarainen, P., Raami, A., Muukkonen, H., & Hakkarainen, K. (in press). Computer-support for collaborative
        designing. International Journal of Technology and Design Education.
Selman, R. L. (1980). The growth of interpersonal understanding. New York: Academic Press.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational Researcher, 27, 4­13.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                     page 81

Stahl, G. (1999). Reflections on WebGuide. Seven issues for the next generation of collaborative knowledge-building
       environments. In C. Hoadley (Ed.), Proceedings of CSCL '99: The Third International Conference on Computer
       Support for Collaborative Learning (pp. 600-610). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stahl, G. (in press). Rediscovering CSCL. In T. Koschmann, R. Hall, & N. Miyake (Eds.), CSCL2: Carrying forward the
       conversation. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press.
Wellman, B., Salaff, J., Dimitrova, D., Garton, L., Gulia, M., & Haythornthwaite, C. (2000). Computer networks as social
       networks: Collaborative work, telework, and virtual community. In E. L. Lesser, M. A. Fontaine, & J. A. Slusher
       (Eds.), Knowledge and Communities (pp. 179-207). Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Wundt, W. (1921). Elements of folk psychology. London: Allen and Unwin.
