Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 82

         Describing Construction of Knowledge through
 Identification of Collaboration Patterns in 3D Learning
                                           Environments
                                                 Ingeborg Krange
                                          InterMedia, University of Oslo
                                                 and Telenor R&D
                                           ingeborg.krange@intermedia.uio.no
                                                     Annita Fjuk
                                                    Telenor R&D
                                       and InterMedia, University of Oslo
                                            annita.fjuk@telenor.com
                                                    Anniken Larsen
                                                    Telenor R&D
                                           anniken.larsen@telenor.com
                                                    Sten Ludvigsen
                                          InterMedia, University of Oslo
                                           sten.ludvigsen@intermedia.uio.no

ABSTRACT
Recent research has to a limited extent explored the nature of collaborative knowledge construction in 3D environments. In
this paper we describe this issue by identifying two collaboration patterns that are manifested in the students' dialogues and
actions in a particular 3D learning environment. The theoretical framework is found within socio-cultural perspectives that
view learning  as socially and culturally constructed   and     of whichartefacts are   considered as inseparable from  human
activity. In agreement with the intellectual heritage, the collaboration patterns are identified through analyses of various
extracts of dialogues and actions taken place between the students and how these extracts are operationalised by available
artefacts. Interaction analysis constitutes the analytic tool.

Keywords
3D environments, collaboration patterns, joint construction of knowledge, dialog analyses.

INTRODUCTION
The aim of the paper is to describe how students construct knowledge collaboratively in 3D learning environments. We
approach this  issue by identifying   collaboration patterns      specific to such environments.    Collaboration patterns  are
understood in terms of how students (actors) act in dialogues and in the usage of artefacts in a particular 3D learning
environment. These kinds of environment "evoke a feeling of immersion, a perceptual and psychological sense of being in
the digital environment presented to the sense" (McLellan 1996: 457). This means that interactivity is of vital importance;
seeing as it includes the feeling of touch, sense orientation and position in space (Gorman et al. 1999). As such, 3D
environments provide ways to experience and view information that are dynamic and interactive. In addition, they are
proclaimed to be appropriate for model building and problem solving (McLellan 1996).
Technological advances have unquestionably been the driving force behind most designs and developments associated with
3D environments. Also, Hoffman & Vu (1997) point to the fact that there is a substantial gap between the technologies
available today and the technology that is needed for realising the expectations for 3D technologies as tools for knowledge
construction. Most of the educationaluses of 3D environments have been developed for professional training in technical
fields such as medical education and military training (Ludvigsen & Fjuk, in press). There exist recent and limited insights
into the nature of human actions in a 3D environment, and more precisely, how these activities evolve with respect to
learning. To achieve a deeper insight into this area of learning, empirical analysis is necessary.
To study the area of learning or construction of knowledge (Mercer & Wegrif 1999) we thoroughly identify collaboration
patterns in a particular 3D learning environment: Corpus Callosum. This environment is developed for the purpose of
constructing a  simulated   learning environment    for collaborative      activities. The  15-year-old  students  are located
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page 83

geographically   separated in such   a  way that their collaboration   only takes place in  networks   and through  real-time
communication. The environment represents a planet that is threatened by an ecological disaster. The students aim to create
a  joint environment  for  task-oriented   conversations and   problem solving   associated with various   forms of  disasters
(flooding, drought and erosion). In this strongly visual 3D environment, all actions are operationalised by various 3D-based
artefacts. The  students   canmanipulate   different kinds  of  available  3D-based artefacts   alone or together,  and their
movements and actions become visible both to themselves and the others during social interaction and oral conversation.
Figure 1 illustrates a situation in which the students (represented by avatars) operationalise an action by manipulating
different pieces of the aqueduct.

                       Figure 1: Students collaborating in Corpus Callosum solving the aqueduct task.
We analyze extracts of dialogues and actions taking place between the students, with interaction analysis as the analytic
tool (Jordan   & Henderson    1995),   and with  socio-cultural theory  as  the framework   for discussion  (Vygotsky   1978;
Engeström 1987).

3D   LEARNING            ENVIRONMENTS:               A   REVIEW        OF    THE    LITERATURE             IN SCIENCE
EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS
3D learning environments that are designed and organised for undergraduate students and in K-12 are very few. In the
literature we find two such environments particularly interesting, and which have been the subject of research into learning
situations. The content in both cases is science education.
Barab et al. (in press) focus on how learning processes in 3D learning environments evolve among 14-15 year-old youth.
The environment developed is aimed at stimulating student-centred learning, in the domain of astronomy. The students are
meant to collaborate "around the computer" rather than through computer networks. The students are exposed to tasks
where they have to transform artefacts. This approach is coloured by their use of activity theory as an analytical tool. Barab
et al. (in press) focus on two basic contradictions during their analysis of classroom activities. One is between learning
astronomy and building 3D models. Another is between teacher directed instruction and the emergent student directed
learning. Both contradictions lose their validity when studying how learning processes in 3D learning environments evolve.
Concerning the former, the authors claim that learning and building models are parts of the same processes. When it comes
to the latter, thetasks are directed towards the construction of new artefacts, which imply that the tasks have the possibilities
to create  learning  trajectories which go  beyond   the distinction between  instruction based  or student centred  learning
environments (Barab et al., in press).
Roussos et al.'s (1999) focal point has been to explore 3D learning environments within the context of primary education.
The designed environment is aimed at giving the students opportunities to explore the life cycle of a garden. The students
should   solve tasks for better   understanding of various  biological processes. They  were    meant to collaborate through
computer networks. Roussos et al. (1999) embrace a constructivist, collaborative and narrative approach to learning. Their
study shows some interesting results related to technical, orientation, affective, cognitive, pedagogical and collaborative
aspects. Here we would like to stress two aspects related to what they have identified as pedagogy and collaboration.
Concerning the former the authors underline that spreading the lessons over multiple "virtual-reality sessions" appears to be
more effective than covering many topics in a single session. Concerning the latter Roussos et al. (1999) emphasize that the
teachers' role mainly was to keep order and to stimulate the students to focus on the task.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Socio-cultural theories represent a distinct perspective for understanding human activity. The relationship between the
social, collective level and how actors think, reason and act is at the core of the theories. As such, the theories are powerful
for understanding and analysing the situated relationships between actors, activities and artefacts. In the study presented in
this paper, these concepts are used to describe construction of knowledge through identifying collaboration patterns in 3D
learning environments.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                   page  84

We use socio-cultural theories in a broad sense and aspects from activity theory more specifically (Vygotsky 1978; Cole
1996; Wertsch 1998; Leontiev 1978, 1983; Engeström 1987). The core argument for using these theories is the emphasis on
the social and cultural basis of human development and the rich approach of understanding the integrated role of artefacts.
The  human    development    is dependent   on  various   kinds   of tools. In  this respect, language  has  an essential  role  for
individuals' learning and for collaboration in a learning community and between various communities (Edwards & Mercer
1987; Bowker & Star 1999; Mercer 2000). Language is thus considered as a socialmode of thinking. Moreover, how
artefacts are developed and used is dependent on the object of the activity since they serve as a means to acquire, construct
and retrieve different kinds of knowledge and performance (Vygotsky 1978; Leontiev 1983). Artefacts are mediators of
both the interactional and the operational aspect of human actions. The former aspect is the way knowledge is constructed
­ individually and collaboratively. The latter aspect of the same action is mediated by the chosen tools. This implies that the
artefacts become both means for knowledge construction and tools.
According    to socio-cultural  theories the context   is essential  for understanding   how   knowledge  is constructed   and   for
identifying  how    collaboration  patterns   evolve   within   learning  communities.    Collective aspects    such   as  rules of
communication and division of work are emphasised (Engeström 1987). These aspects mediate the students' activities in
such a way that they are not isolated, but part of a learning community. The artefacts used, the learning community the
student belongs to, and the explicitly or implicitly expressed rules and the division of work/task within that community
therefore affect the individual's actions.
In the design of the learning environment, Corpus Callosum, we stressed the organisation of mutual relations between
actors, actions and artefacts. In that way, this environment differs from most 3D environments because it is arranged
especially for learning. Outlined from narrow studies of the students' learning activities in Corpus Callosum containing a
set of various   artefacts, three main   situational  relations were   identified (Fjuk  &  Krange   1999).  First, the  actor-actor
relationship  makes    the  students able  to   talk through    a real-time  communication     system.  Second,   the   actor-object
relationship makes it possible for the students to operate and manipulate artefacts by clicking, lifting and moving them, and
makes premises on how they can act according to socio-material possibilities and constraints in the learningenvironment.
Third, the object-object relationship concerns how manipulation of one artefact affects another artefact in the learning
environment. This relation can be initiated by an actor where the result is a kind of domino effect between artefacts andit
can be subscribed by how characteristics of one artefact seen in relation to another artefact can give significant information
to the student. To construct joint knowledge about how to solve a task in this specific learning environment, the students
have to interact and collaborate (actor-actor); they must individually or collaboratively construct knowledge about the
relation between    artefacts  (object-object); they   must  individually   or  collaboratively  manipulate  certain    objects  and
coordinate themselvesaccording to the possibilities and constraints in the learning environment (actor-object). In other
words,   the way    in which    language,  dialogues   and  talks  are   supported   and mediated  by   artefacts   in 3D  learning
environments becomes a complex area of study,which is grounded in how the actors relate themselves to other actors, but
also to the material environment they are a part of.

METHODOLOGY
The socio-cultural perspectives offer a rich set of possible units of analysis and levels of descriptions. This provides the
analysts with tools that, e.g., make it possible to vary from broad descriptions of activities, to more detailed levels of
actions and operations. To study learning processes in Corpus Callosum, we have analysed extracts of dialogues and the
individuals' actions by using interaction analysis as an analytical tool (Jordan & Henderson 1995). Data gathered from
video recordings of the students' activities in the virtual environment constitute the basis in this study. It is straightforward
to have one of the networked clients act as a recorder, allowing the entire session in the 3D learning environment to be
played back during later analysis. We used the teacher client as a recorder. The teachers' position provided an overview of
all the activities in the 3D environment. This approach provides us with possibilities to focus on the temporal organisation
of  dialogues   and actions,  but also on  how   the  technical   artefacts are used  to operationalise certain   actions. Another
important aspect is that the experiences of the students become visible and documented in the "temporal orderliness and
project ability of the events they construct" (Jordan & Henderson 1995: 61). The temporal dimensions are important, but
we also want to emphasize the socio-spatial aspects.By socio-spatial aspects we mean how the students oriented themselves
in the environment. This becomes especially important when the students move with avatars in Corpus Callosum.
To explore how students construct knowledge in 3D learning environments by studies of how collaboration patterns evolve,
three extracts of dialogues associated with the students' work with the aqueduct task were chosen. The rationale of the task
was that the students had to pick up and place the aqueduct pieces in the remaining aqueduct-foundation (the H's). The
aqueduct pieces have different colours, and by placing the pieces correctly, the colours formed a colour spectrum from red
to blue. The task was constructed so that the students themselves found what objects to use and how to place them as well
as forming the correct colour spectrum. In the empirical analysis we studied all the dialogues and actions performed by the
students. The extracts are chosen to show major differences in how the students relate to each other and to the artefacts in
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page  85

the environment. The aqueduct task was rather complex in the sense that it required integration of other tasks as well as
reasoning and negotiation.
The transcriptions of the data are conducted in the following way: When the students only talked together, we transcribed
the dialogue as it unfolded. Short pauses and overlaps are indicated in the text. When students both talked and performed
actions we transcribed the utterances as they unfolded, but also made an indication of what the students were doing. Such
an approach creates a high level of transparency so that the reader can follow the argumentation.

EMPIRICAL     ANALYSIS:         CONSTRUCTION         OF   KNOWLEDGE         BY         IDENTIFYING     COLLABORATION
PATTERNS IN A 3D LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
Joint construction of knowledge     is described  by  identifying two  main collaboration       patterns. These patterns are
characterised by either sequentially or dynamically oriented activities. By sequentially oriented we indicate that the students
perform the actions one after the other, and that they neither reflect upon them nor the specific character of the learning
environment they are a part of. Dynamically oriented actions have a more cyclic character. When an actor tries something
out, they will return to these actions and have some kind of reflection about the actions performed. This implies that the
students' activities differ according to how they relate to each other, and how they manipulate and share their experiences
connected to the artefacts.
It is important to note that the identification of collaboration patterns should be understood as analytical constructions,
based on the data in itself, and the theoretical lenses used. We argue that there is no direct mapping from data to theory ­ or
vice versa ­ a direct mapping from data to the analysis performed. Our empirical analysis is rather described as a bottom-up
approach where the concepts are developed through our work with the data. These concepts arethen used as part of the
analysis where the theoretical framework is used. In the next passages, we exemplify this by studies of some extracts of
dialogues and related actions.
Collaboration pattern one: Sequential
There are two main subcategories of collaboration patterns according to the sequentially oriented actions. These are either
based on actions characterised by hypotheses testing or on actions typified by trial and error.

Collaboration based on hypotheses testing
The dialogue that follows is selected from a setting where some students are about to start solving the aqueduct task. They
have chosen to locate in the same area of the planet, while listening to the exercise.
Teacher             What shall we do then?
                    (2)
Student 1           Yesterday, when I was moving around, I saw a lot of pieces around the mountains, that I
                    didn't really know what was.
Student 2           Maybe it's the purple ones?
Student 1           Yes. Or they were a kind of long sticks with a sort of ... They were grey and red.
                    (2)
Student 2           Mmm
                    (1)
Student 2           Some of the things I saw were similar.
Student 3           I saw them as well.
Teacher             Shall we assume that those are the right ones, and begin to collect them?
Student 3           Yes. But where shall we put them ... to build those things?
Student 4           On that island?
Student 3           Yes
Student 2           Do you think that we can manage to bring them with us alone, or do you think that we have
                    to get together two and two?
Student 4           We must try. Try alone first.
Student 2           Yes.
Student 4           Can't we?
Student 1           Shall we start walking, or ...?
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 86

Student 3             We'll go around searching, and then we will see what we find.
Teacher               Yes. Okay. Great. Go on ...
This extract of dialogue shows three different negotiation sequences. First (sentence 1-8) the students are negotiating about
what kind of objects that can be used for building the aqueduct. Further, (sentences 9-11) they negotiate about where they
shall bring the objects. Finally, (sentence 12-15) they discuss how they can manage to bring the objects to the island.
Through these negotiation sequences the students are making several hypotheses that they will try out in their further work.
The extract also gives us important information about the students' and teachers' actions during communication while one
of the students asks if they shall start to walk (sentences 16-18). This indicates an interesting issue, namely that the students
have not moved their avatars during the conversation. This interpretation is confirmed if we look at the video recordings of
the pupils' interactions: The group does not split up until they have set out detailed hypotheses on how they are going to
solve the task. Another interesting aspect is the teacher's role in the students' collaborative processes. The teacher takes the
initiative related to the activities the students should perform (sentence 1), summarizes and stimulates to a turn in the
students' discussion (sentence 8) and confirms that the students can start to act (sentence 18).
The analysis of this  extract   of dialogue indicates that the students mainly collaborate   through  hypotheses  testing   and
sequentially oriented actions. The actors make a scenario associated with their expectation of what artefacts they are going
to use and what actions they must perform in order to solve the task. During their collaboration it became evident that they
were strictly loyal to the hypotheses they had made. They did not change their hypotheses for action in their meeting with
the artefacts. They act as if they had total knowledge of the environment. In this way they exclude the probability of
including unforeseen artefacts and different action possibilities. Further, their collaboration pattern is also characterised by
a low level of division of work, and their activities are guided by collectivistic norms (Engeström 1987). This observation
indicates that the students principally relate to the activities and the artefacts as representations and not as parts of their
collaborative praxis.
According to the sequentially oriented collaboration the students are able to construct joint knowledge of the development
of the action expiration, but they do not attain such knowledge striving to solve the task. This becomes evident because they
are first able to solve the task when the teacher gives them a specific and directional hint. In other words, the sequentially
oriented pattern, dominated by hypotheses testing collaboration, does not stimulate joint construction of knowledge that is
relevant for solving the problem.

Collaboration based on trial and error
The conversation below is gathered from a situation where some students have worked with the aqueduct exercise for a
while. One of the aqueduct pieces has already been placed at the foundation. The students move around with different
aqueduct pieces. One of the students is just looking and does not participate in the dialogue that follows.
Student 1             Now I placed it somewhere. (He has an aqueduct piece in his hands and gets rid of it up in
                      the air.)
Student 2             Yes, it's there. (We can see the aqueduct piece hanging in the air.)
Student 3             Where?
Student 2             I'm nearly standing on it. (He fetches Student 1's aqueduct piece.)
Student 1             No, shit.
Student 3             Now you fetched it. Yes. Then it is okay. (He tries to place an aqueduct piece without
                      succeeding.)
Student 1             One of the iron things landed in the air, but when you get closer to it, it suddenly disappears.
Teacher               Can you see any differences in the various aqueduct elements?
Student 3             Maybe some of them are a little bit smaller than the others? (They move around with objects
                      while talking.)
                      (1)
Student 1             I would like to use that one.
Student 3             The one Thala has looks quite small.
Student 1             They look small when you hold them, I think. When you place them they look a lot bigger.
                      (3)
Student 3             Yes. Thala succeeded in placing one. (The aqueduct piece increases while it is placed on the
                      foundation and is placed next to the piece that is already there.)
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                              page  87

                      (1)
Student 1             Did they fit together? There are different colours on each of them. At least these two. (The
                      students get rid of the objects and look at the aqueduct pieces together.)
Student 2             Yes, but then ...
Student 3             Maybe it's going to be ...
Student 1             It doesn't look like they really fit together. (They are hanging around and are looking to see
                      if the aqueduct pieces fit together.)
Student 3             Maybe it should be rr ...
Student 1             And ­ the one Thala placed is kind of vertical on the end.
This extract of dialogue consists of two sequences. In the first (sentences 1-7), we see that the students are discussing where
and how to place the aqueduct pieces. Moreover, we observe that they struggle to put the different objects in the intended
places. They are confused about what is happening and it seems obvious that they do not really understand the functionality
of the system. They do not manage to share each other's experiences. It is not until the second sequence that they manage to
build on each other's knowledge and their work process seems to turn into a new phase (sentences 8-19). It is important to
mention that this seems to be a result of the teacher's intervention (sentence 8). The teacher gives them an essential hint that
leads to a breakthrough in the collaboration.The students start to discuss the difference between the aqueduct pieces, about
the size and why it varies (sentence 10). Thereafter it is the shape of the objects that is in focus: first the colours (sentences
14-18) then the construction of each element (sentence 19).
The dialogue between the students indicates that this collaboration process can be characterized as trial and error oriented.
Unlike group one, group two starts to act prior to setting out hypotheses on how to relate to the artefacts and which
activities that must be completed to solve the task. Further, it is primarily after the teacher's involvement that it is possible
to register something that resembles hypotheses testing activities. In the first sequence it is quite obvious that there is no
common strategy for their activities. In the second sequence (8-19) there is a slight change. The students are still acting
prior to reflection, but now they are at least discussing the outcome of their actions after words. The collaboration can also
be characterised as rather sequentially oriented, but in the opposite way of the first extract of dialogue: They act prior to
sharing the information from individual experiences.
This means that the actors do not make any action expirations. They have an opposite collaboration pattern to that of the
students in the first extract of dialogue. At best we see actors discussing the outcome of their actions and the use of
different artefacts together. The primary basis for action is the artefacts. Their collaboration patterns are characterised by a
high division of labour, and individualistic norms describe their activities (Engeström 1987). We maintain that the actors in
the second group primarily relate to their actions and the artefacts in the 3D learning environment on an individual basis
and that the problem solving therefore never really becomes a part of collaborative praxis.
According to the sequentially oriented collaboration the students are not able to construct joint knowledge on their own.
Only after the teacher's intervention do they manage to construct such knowledge in such a way that they are able to solve
the task. In other words, the sequentially oriented pattern, dominated by trial and error collaboration, does not stimulate to
joint construction of knowledge that is relevant for solving the problem.
These two   groups  of students   have  in one  sense  distinct   ways of collaboration represented by   the concepts of being
hypotheses testing and trial and error oriented. Nevertheless, their collaboration patterns indicate an important sign of
equation, namely the sequentially divided work pattern and the lack of joint construction of knowledge related to problem
solving. None of them seem to have gained consistent knowledge of how the 3D learning environment actually works. This
implies that the  students are not  able   to utilise the functionality  of the  3D learning environment   in a way   that it is
transparent  for them  and  their problem-solving     activities. The  relation between  actors, actions and  artefactsbecomes
sequential.

Collaboration pattern two: Dynamic
There is one main dynamically oriented collaboration pattern. The following conversation is between some students when
they are about to start off the aqueduct task. They are moving around in the 3D learning environment.
Student 1             Okay, then I think we just pick up some pieces and place them in the H's ... those iron
                      things.
Student 2             Now I picked up an aqueduct.
Student 3             Okay, shall we get the ones which are placed around?
Student 4             Yes, the ones that look like they can conduct water.
Student 2             The aqueduct has been picked up.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                           page   88

Student 1           It's not ... there are many ...
Student 3           Shall they ... do they like, live in the H's? (Bringing in an aqueduct piece, and putting it
                    on the foundation.)
Student 2           I think they should lie in the H's (Moves towards the aqueduct base.)
                    (3)
Student 1           Okay, I'll try that. I'm not sure about it.
Student 2           Okay, Student 1 is on his way with an object. (All four of them are gathering around the
                    aqueduct.)
Student 1           Yes. (He is coming towards the island with an aqueduct object.)
Student 2           We also have to ensure that they fit smoothly into each other.
Student 3           They will do that automatically for sure.
Student 1           Like this. I placed one. I don't know how it looks. Lets see ...
Student 4           That turned out well, I think.
Student 1           Oh yeah. It's beautiful.
The extract of dialogue contains two sequences. In the first sequence (sentences 1-8), the students are discussing what
objects they shall collect, what they look like, and wherethey shall place them. They manage to develop a common platform
for understanding how   to solve  the   task. It is striking how the students   make use   of figurative descriptions to give
information to the others, which utterances like "look like they can conduct water" (sentence 2) and "the H's" (sentences 3
and 4) are examples of. It is also important to note that the students in this sequence change between moving their avatars
in different areas of the learning environment executing different activities and being co-located around the aqueduct. In the
second sequence (sentences 9-16), their discussion becomes even more specific while they in collaboration try out different
strategies for rebuilding the aqueduct and evaluate how it looks afterwards. The students are co-located around the aqueduct
while talking. The students start to move around and act immediately. At the same time, they try to convince each other that
the choices they are making are the correct ones. It is also worth mentioning that the teacher in this sequence does not
intervene in the students' collaboration processes. Instead it seems that Student 1 takes a kind of moderator-role. He starts
out by suggesting what to do (sentence 1), after a while he summarises the discussion (sentence 9) and lastly he concludes
the outcome (sentence 16). In this way, he seems to gather the students both socially and thematically, and stimulate the
progression in the problem solving process.
The students' collaboration is characterized by continuous shifts between trial and error oriented activities and hypotheses
testing activities. This observation indicates a more dynamic collaboration pattern. This implies that the students interact in
a specific manner with each other as well as with the artefacts at the "same time". This way of collaboration enables the
students to reform and correct their original hypotheses during their collaboration processes, and further, the flexibility
seems to be crucial for their joint construction of knowledge.
This entails that the actors are making a kind of action expiration together at the same time as they are interacting with the
artefacts. This makes it likely to include unforeseen artefacts and different action possibilities concurrently as these are the
focus of their conversational problem solving. This group is able to optimise the learning opportunities, because they both
explore the environment and reflect on their actions. They learn how to use the contingencies and constraints of the
environment (Greeno 1995). This group, opposed to the two previous groups, has found a balance in their activities. Their
collaboration patterns are characterised by a combination of a high and a low degree of division of work, and their norms
provide opportunities for the individual actor to perform specific actions, but these actions have to be reported back to the
other students, a form of collectivistic individualism (Engeström 1987). We thus claim that the actors relate to their actions
and the artefacts in the 3D learning environment at a collective basis and that the problem solving therefore really becomes
a part of their collaborative praxis.
According to their dynamically oriented collaboration the students are able to construct joint knowledge while solving the
task. In opposition to the sequentially oriented patterns, the students are able to gain consistent knowledge of how the 3D
learning environment actually works. This implies that the students manage to utilise the functionality of the 3D learning
environment in such a way that it is transparent to them during the problem solving process. The relation between actors,
actions and artefacts becomes dynamic.

CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FURTHER WORK
This paper is a contribution to understanding collaboration patterns in 3D environments and how the embedded actions
evolve with respect to  learning.     The aim has   been to  identifyvarious collaboration patterns to describe collaborative
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page 89

knowledge    construction in  a  specific 3D   learning environment.  The  patterns are   identified through     analysis of  the
interrelations between actors, actions and artefacts. Interaction analysis has constituted the analytical tool.
We have identified two main collaboration patterns that are characterised as either sequentially or dynamically oriented
actions. These have been discussed in the light of two subordinated aspects. These are actions characterised by hypotheses
testing or trial and error. These aspects operate separately in the sequentially oriented pattern, and flexibly in the one that is
dynamically oriented. The main conclusion is that the students who work sequentially oriented have problemsconstructing
joint knowledge associated with problem solving, while those who work more dynamically oriented are more successful
when working with the task. One important aspect of their success is their movement in different areas of the environment
and how   they relate   these actions to  each  other. When  talking to each other  and   trying out  different   aspects  of the
environment, they use the spatial affordences more creatively than the two other groups. In other words, the dynamically
oriented group is able to utilise the functionality of the 3D learning environment in a way that becomes transparent to them
during their problem solving process, while the former does not.
The findings in this paper point out two important issues. One is related to the design of the 3D learning environment and to
what extent it is adequate in supporting and mediating different learning activities, and the other is related to the teachers'
role shaping and how this is related to the students' collaborative processes. According tothe former, our analysis indicates
that it is just the students whose collaboration is characterised as dynamically oriented that are able to construct joint
knowledge that is relevant for problem solving. This in spite of the fact that all of them actually manage to solve the task.
This implies that the design of the 3D learning environment makes is possible to solve the task - at one level - without
achieving a shared understanding of the tasks and the specific functionality of the environment.
Corpus Callosum is a "closed" community, which implies that the learning activities are performed `on demand' and
synchronously amongst the students. Concerning a more demanding and complex knowledge domain the assumption that
all learning activities should be operationalised in the 3D learning environment is arguably too simplistic. We know from
learning research that the quality of the learning processes is highly dependent on the learners' previous knowledge, the
complexity of the knowledge domain, the learners'ability to regulate the learning processes, and the situated character of
knowledge acquired (Brandsford et al. 2000). These processes raise the question of complexity related to the way in which
different aspects will influence the learning environment over a period of time. Moreover, Roussos et al. (1999) and Dede
et al. (1996) argue for instance that spreading the lessons over multiple 3D sessions appears to be more effective than
covering many topics in a single session. If we make a normative turn in argumentation, this implies that other types of
learning resources should be part of a new design, and further, that the 3D learning environment should be included in a
more comprehensive curriculum. The students' work could be organized in larger projects. This may support a more
adequate learning trajectory for the students, simultaneously with the 3D learning environment becoming an important part
of the students' learning processes.
The latter essential feature concerns how the teachers shape their role in this specific learning environment. The teacher
plays an ambiguous role, also in learning activities that take place in 3D learning environments. Concerning how the
students performed in Corpus Callosum, neither of the students that acted sequentially oriented were able to construct joint
knowledge related to task solving. As a result, the teacher had to intervene to generate a more adequate work progress. This
issue is similar to Roussos et al.'s (1999) findings where the teacher had to intervene to keep the students on the task. These
are immediately problematic findings because the teacher's directional role probably never really gives the students the
opportunities to form their own agenda. Moreover, neither the students nor the teacher manage to interact with artefacts in
an adequate way for problem solving. This issue constitutes an interesting scope for further work.
Concerning the students that acted more dynamically oriented, they were able to use the artefacts constructively in their
collaborative processes. Whether this could be explained by the more passive role of the teacher is an open question. Barab
et al. (in press) claim that neither the teacher nor the pupils are directing the activities, but artefacts are. This claim is
concerned with the process of learning from and with artefacts. In Corpus Callosum it is possible to give feedback to actors
by  help  of artefacts. This  feedback   can in principle  give procedural  direction, or on the  other  hand,      give learning
possibilities for activities with a cyclic character. But without a collective effort among the students, the feedback cannot be
transformed to process where knowledge is co-constructed. Since few complex concepts could be learned based on a
procedure and within a short time frame and hardly in one teaching session, the design process should make dynamic and
cyclic oriented actions and activities more transparent, both inside and outside a 3D environment. This direction of design
can break the dichotomy between students or teacher centred learning environment, because the focus would be on the use
and construction of artefacts. If so, the students and the teacher must focus on production of knowledge and new artefacts in
different situations rather than how   the student-teacher  relationships should be regulated.   This does      not eliminate the
problem of the teacher-student relationships, but provides insight into how to design a learning environment where the
production of artefacts is in focus.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page 90

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The      3D       learning      environment         is     part      of      the            EduAction       project       (see:
http://www.telenor.no/fou/program/nomadiske/eduaction.shtml) and is developed by using the DOVRE API (Hagen 1999).
Several papers and reports are being published during the project period. Most of these are design-oriented (Krange & Fjuk
1999; Fjuk & Krange 1999; Krange et al. 2000), but some have also focused on characteristics of knowledge construction
(Larsen & Krange 2001). We want to thank Telenor Research and Development and the Network for IT-Research and
Competence in Education for funding our research project, EduAction. Corpus Callosum was developed together with
Simen Hagen, Ragnhild Halvorsrud, Nina Khalayli, Ivar Kjellmo, Lars Nilsson, Heidi Rognskog, Ola Ødegård, and the
teachers and students at Ringstabekk secondary school. We are grateful to them all. We also want to thank teachers and
students at Nordberg and Ringstabekk secondary schools for participating in the field trial. Finally, we want to thank Rich
Ling for fruitful discussions related to the labelling of the collaboration patterns.

REFERENCES
Barab, S., A., Barnett, M., Yamagata-Lynch, L., Squire, K., & Keating, T. (in press). "Using activity theory to understand
        the contradictions characterizing a technology-rich introductory astronomy course." To appear in Mind, Culture,
        and Activity. At http://inkido.indiana.edu/research/onlinemanu/papers/acttheory.pdf
Bowker, G.C. & Star, S.L. 1999: Sorting Things Out. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Pres.
Brandsford, J., Brown, A.L. & Coocking, R. 2000. How People Learn. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Dede, C., Salzmann, M. C. & Loftin, R. B. 1996. "ScienceSpace: Virtual realities for learning complex and abstract
        scientific concepts." In Proceedings of the IEEE 1996 Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium. CA, Los
        Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Cole, M. 1996. Cultural Psychology. A once and future discipline. Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press.
Edwards, D & Mercer, N. 1987. Common Knowledge: The Development of Understanding in the Classroom. London:
        Methuen.
Engeström,  Y. 1987. Learning   by  expanding:   An activity-theoretical approach        to developmental research.    Helsinki:
        Orienta-Konsultit.
Fjuk, A. & Krange, I. 1999. "The situated effects of awareness in distributed collaborative learning: Interactive 3D an
        example." In Hoadley, C. & Roschelle, J. (eds.) Proceedings for: Computer Support for Collaborative Learning.
        Designing New Media for a New Millenium: Collaborative technology for learning. Educating and Training.
        Stanford University.
Gorman, Meier & Krummel, 1999. "Simulation and Virtual Reality in Surgical Education." In Archives of Surgery. Vol.
        134. No. 11. (http://archsurg.ama-assn.org/issues/v134n11/full/ssa9016.html)
Greeno, J.G. 1995. "Understanding Concepts in Activity." In Weaver, C., Fletcher, C.R, & Mannes, S. (eds.) Discourse
        comprehension: Essays in honor of Walter Kintsch. N.J. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hagen, S. 1999. "DOVRE white paper." Internal report. Telenor R&D.
Hoffman, H. & Vu, D. 1997. "Virtual Reality: Teaching Tool of the Twenty-first Century?" In Academic Medicine. Vol.
        72. No 12. Pp: 1076-1081.
Jordan, B. &  Henderson,   A. 1995. "Interaction Analysis: Foundations   and Practice."       In The  Journal   of the Learning
        Sciences. Vol. 4. Nr. 1. Pp: 39-103.
Krange, I. & Fjuk, A. 1999.   "Designing collaborative   learning system  through       distributed interactive 3D:  A  Culture-
        Historical Perspective." In Proceedings at the 19th World Conference on Open Learning and Distance Education.
        ICDE. Vienna 20th ­ 24th June 1999.
Krange, I., Kristiansen, T., Helljesen, L., Ødegård, O. & Fjuk, A. 2000. "Collaborative learning in schools by distributed
        use of interactive 3D technology." Telenor R&D report 18/2000.
Larsen, A. & Krange, I. 2000. "Analysing learning and collaboration in distributed 3D learning environments." E-CSCL
        2001: Poster presentation.
Leontiev, N. 1978. Activity, Consciousness, Personality. Englewood Cliffs, Prentice Hall. New York.
Leontiev, N. 1983. Virksomhed, bevidsthed og Personlighed. Köbenhavn: Forlaget Progress.
Ludvigsen, S. & Fjuk, A. (in press). "Tools in Social Practice: Learning, Medical Education and 3D Environments." To
        appear in Outlines.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                 page 91

McLellan, H. 1996. "Virtual Realities." In Jonassen, D.J. (Ed.) Handbook of Research for Educational Communications
       and Technology. New York: Macmillian.
Mercer, N. 2000. Words and Minds: How we use language to think together. London: Routlegde.
Mercer, N. & Wegrif. R. 1999. "Is `exploratory talk' productive talk?" In Littleton, K. & Light, P. (eds.). 1999. Learning
       with computers. Analyzing productive interaction. New York: Routledge.
Roussos, M., Johnson, A., Moher, T., Leigh, J., Vasilakis, C. & Barnes, C. 1999. "Learning and Building Together in an
       Immersive Virtual World." Presence. Vol. 8. No. 3. Pp: 247-263.
Vygotsky, L.S 1978. Mind in Society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Wertsch, J.V. 1998: Mind as Action. New York: Oxford University Press.
