Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page    92

            OCAF: An Object-oriented Model of Analysis of
                               Collaborative Problem Solving
                         N.M. Avouris1, A. Dimitracopoulou2, V. Komis1, C. Fidas1
                                         1University of Patras, Patras, Greece
                                      2University of the Aegean, Rhodes, Greece
      N.Avouris@ee.upatras.gr, adimitr@rhodes.aegean.gr, komis@upatras.gr, fidas@ee.upatras.gr
ABSTRACT
Computer-supported collaborative problem solving requires new methodological approaches of interaction and problem
solving analysis.   Usually  analysis of collaborative    problem   solving  situations is done  through   discourse  analysis or
interaction analysis,  where   in the center   of attention   are  the  actors involved  (students, tutors etc.). An   alternative
framework, called "Object-oriented Collaboration Analysis Framework (OCAF)" is presented here, according to which the
objects of the collaboratively developed solution become the center of attention and are studied as entities that carry their
own   history. This   approach produces  a   view   of   the process,  according to  which   the solution  is made  of structural
components that are `owned' by actors who have contributed in various degrees to their development. OCAF is based on
both actions and dialogues of actors, providing qualitative as well as quantitative indicators of collaboration and solution
quality. The paper presents first the framework notation. Examples of its use in analysis of distance groups and face-to-face
collaborative activities are provided next, followed by the dimensions of the framework supported analysis for teachers and
researchers. Web-based tools supporting the OCAF approach are also presented.

Keywords
Collaborative problem solving analysis, face-to-face collaboration analysis, dialogue-action analysis, web-based analysis
tools

INTRODUCTION
The methodological issues of collaboration analysis are important to the effectiveness of the collaborative learning process,
the designation of appropriate learning activities and settings, as well as the design of collaborative technology-based
learning environments. Analysis of collaborative problem-solving situations is usually done through discourse analysis
(Baker et al., 1999), task analysis interaction analysis, or even a combination of methods (Komis, Avouris & Fidas, 2001),
with the objective to evaluate the situation, the learning process and often the tools used. A number of different approaches
have been developed for the analysis of collaborative activities in different mediums and environments. Some of them are
focused on problem solving strategies or on plan recognition (Hoppe & Ploetzner, 1999), others on the evaluation of
partners' involvement (Simmof, 1999), or on the process of mutual understanding and the learning effects (Baker et al.,
1999).  There  are  approaches  of  analysis implemented      after the interaction  and others  that are  applicable during   the
evolution of the collaborative process, thus providing assistance tools that are able to evaluate personal contribution and
visualise collaboration patterns (Simmof, 1999).
It seems that in this research field, collaboration analysis is mainly based on analysis of naturally occurring dialogue, due to
a remaining dominant psychological interest in answering general questions related to understanding collaborative learning.
It is interesting to  examine  the main  analysis   approaches,    in  the specific category of  technology-based   collaborative
problem solving systems related to `diagrammatic solutions', a category where the actions of collaborative partners are of
main importance. This is due to the fact that these actions reveal information on the quality of involved concepts and
strategies of  pupils in a  learning  process. In   this category,  representative  research and  analysis approaches   are: The
networked collaborative concept mapping system produced by CRESST (Chung et al., 1999), the CardDalis prototype
(Muehlenbrock & Hoppe, 1999) interesting in terms of group action-driven interaction analysis, the research related to the
C-CHENE system (Baker et al., 1999), designed to support dyads of students collaborating in the construction of diagrams
of energy   chains,  and the BELVEDERE         v.2, a  networked    software   system, allowing  students  to collaborate during
scientific inquiries (Suthers, 1999). Dominant approach of analysis in relevant experimentations, is the dialogue-oriented
one. Even if in some cases, like the COLER system experimentations (Suthers & Hundhausen, 2001), common transcripts
of dialogues and actions are reported, a well coordinated analysis related to the components of the reported solutions is not
included. Moreover, in all these analysis techniques the center of attention are usually the actors (students, teachers etc.)
and the dialogues, while the developed objects often enter the scene only as items on which operations are effected and as
subjects of discussion.
An alternative and complementary framework of analysis is presented here, according to which the objects of the solution,
that is the objects that exist in the `micro world', become the center of attention and are studied as entities that carry their
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                               page   93

own history and are acted upon by their owners. This perspective produces a new view of the process, according to which
the solution is made up of structural components that are "owned" by actors who have contributed in various degrees to the
produced solution. This view of the world, which is a reversed view of the one we usually build of the problem solving
process, can be useful, as it reveals the contribution of the various actors in parts of the solution, identifies areas of intense
collaboration in relation to the final solution and can relate easily to other analysis frameworks like interaction analysis.
According to this view an operational framework of analysis and evaluation of collaborative problem solving has been
defined called `Object-oriented  Collaboration   Analysis Framework"     (OCAF),    also described   in Avouris   et al. (2001).
OCAF's corresponding analytic model identifies patterns of interaction and relates them to objects of the shared solution.
The model provides a new way of representing collaborative problem solving activity, taking into account both actions and
dialogues  of partners and supports  qualitative and quantitative representations    that  can   be used as   meta-analysis   and
evaluation tools. The  framework   has   been used  for the analysis    of various   kinds   of collaborative problem    solving
environments based on jointly developed diagrammatic `solutions', made of well distinguished objects, such as concept
maps, entity-relationship diagrams, diagrams of specific modeling formalisms, architectural diagrams, etc. It is shown that
this approach can be applied both in synchronous distance-collaboration environments (dialogue via written messages) and
in co-located group collaboration when a more oral-dialogue oriented collaboration occurs.
The proposed analysis framework proposes a model that can be generated and further processed by adequate tools, attached
to a collaboration support environment. These tools could be used not only by researchers but also by teachers managing
on-line distance collaborative problem solving or by students, in an appropriate form, as a meta-cognitive or collaboration
meta-analysis tool, helping them self-regulate their actions and their involvement.
Most of the existing collaboration systems present limitations when used by young students in real school settings. Some of
the limitations are attributed to the fact that the teacher who is in charge of several students, fails to interpret the enormous
number of complex interactions that can take place simultaneously. Acknowledging this limitation, researchers have started
to work on addressing this problem. Systems that aggregate the interaction data of logfiles into a set of high-level indicators
and present them to the participants or the teacher have been proposed. From these systems, we could distinguish three
main categories: (a) Systems that present or visualize indicators concerning exchanged patterns in a discussion. The system
proposed by Simmof (1999) visualizes in an innovative way discussion threads with nested boxes exploiting quantitative
information on participation rates in exchanged messages. In MarCo, a dialogue oriented system (Tedesco & Self 2000), a
mechanism detects disagreements and conflicts between users' beliefs or intentions, on the basis of selected dialogue acts.
(b) Tools based on qualitative analysis of members actions, deriving higher order descriptions of group activities, such as
the CardDalis system (Muehlenbrock & Hoppe 1999) were applied in the low level conceptual task of puzzle resolution.
FACT (More & Moriyon 2001) is another framework that produces tree-like histories, related to actions. (c) Systems that
analyse messages   and  actions such as  the system  under  development    by Jermann     et al. (2001)  that displays   separate
indicators of participation rates on messages and others on actions. Other systems, such as EPSILON (Soller & Lesgold,
2000) and COLER (Constantino-Consalez & Suthers, 2001), analyse data from actions and messages and monitor directly
group members by appropriate messages, without presenting the derived information to users (students or teachers).

In order to develop effective analysis frameworks and tools for collaborative problem solving, the research community
needs to investigate some key questions:
How to coordinate the analysis of actions and dialogues?
How to inter-relate collaboration features with problem solving content and process?
How  to  go   beyond simple quantitative  indicators (e.g. participation   rates) to more    sophisticated  ones, such   as   role
distribution that involve analysis of semantic aspects of interaction?
·   How to provide a rich variety of analysis output, to assist facilitators or experienced learners?
This paper makes an attempt to explore some of the above issues. First the OCAF framework and its model in textual and
diagrammatic form are presented. Subsequently, some analysis examples are presented, through two different case studies,
involving a synchronous distance-collaboration environment and a co-located group collaboration. The analysis dimensions
of these cases are discussed in view of OCAF applicability and usefulness in research and teaching issues. The main
functionality of a tool supporting the OCAF framework is also presented.

THE OCAF FRAMEWORK
The proposed framework is based on two basic considerations, one related to the object oriented view of collaborating
actors' roles and contributions and the other to the unified analysis of dialogues and actions on objects.
a) The diagrammatic solution of the problem is a representation of the shared effort of the involved partners as well as of
their shared memory. In OCAF we shift the center of attention on these objects of the solution. That implies that these
objects, constitutive of the solution, are studied as entities that carry their own history and are acted upon by their owners
(the actors involved in their conception, creation, modification and inter-relation in the specific diagrammatic solution built
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                  page    94

by them). This perspective produces a new view of the process, according to which the solution is made up from structural
components that are "owned" by actors who have contributed in various degrees to the produced solution. This "object
oriented view" focuses on the ownership of the constitutive objects of the solution, covering also parts of the solution that
have not been completed or have been rejected in the process.
b) Previous research has shown (Baker et al., 1999) that mutual understanding among the collaborative agents takes place
via a combination of perception of graphical action and communication. Furthermore, depending on the provided tools
facilitating dialogue, the collaboration mode can vary from a more action-dominant mode to a more discussion-based mode.
For these reasons, it is argued that there is a need to apply a unified analysis and interpretation of both dialogue and actions
related to the solution objects, in order to analyze and evaluate collaborative activities in diagrammatic problem solution.
From the resulting framework of analysis, a model M of the solution is defined, conceived in this context, as a formal
model, that can be used to analyze or reconstruct certain aspects of both actions and dialogues occurring in the problem-
solving group. This model of ownership of the solution is based on the notion of ownership of the components of the
diagrammatic solution. Such a diagram in many cases is made of objects (entities) that are shown in the diagram in abstract
or pictorial form. These can be related through relationships often shown or implied in the solution. The entities have
attributes or properties that are associated to them. The entity/relationship/attribute constructs could be the basic objects that
make a diagrammatic solution according to the proposed notation of the framework. The proposed model according to
OCAF has been formalized in textual and diagrammatic form as follows:
Let a given Solution S of a problem X be: S(X) = { Ei , Rj, Am,} , Where E represent the node entities of the solution, ( i=1,
..., k) R the relationships connecting them (j=1,...,l) and A the attributes of the entities (m=1, ..., n) that participate in the
solution.
The model of the solution can be:
     M (S)= { Ei       * i /Pi fj, Pk fl , ... Rj  * i / Pi fj, Pk fl , ...,  Am * i / Pi fj, Pk fl , ...;
            -Ei  * i / Pi fj, Pk fl , ..., -Rj * i / Pi fj, Pk fl , ..., -Am * i / Pi fj, Pk fl , ... }
Where: E, R, A, are the entities, relations and attributes that are part of the final solution, while with ­E, -R, -A the items
discussed during the problem solving process, but not appearing in the final solution, are shown. i is an index of the item,
as implied by its initial action of insertion or by its discussion in the timeline of the problem solving process.
To each item a sequence of Pi fj is associated. Each Pi fj represents the human agent Pi (e.g. a student, teacher or facilitator)
participating in a direct or indirect way in the problem solving process and his/her functional role fj related to the particular
part of the solution.
The different functional roles f used in OCAF are described in Table 1. It should be noticed that two functional roles
concern the initial proposition to insert the item (by action (I) or by dialogue (P)), while the others express the discussion on
each item. Also testing of the proposed solution is done through argumentation (A) in the case of static-diagrammatic
solutions, while testing can involve use of alternative representations and provided testing tools in case of development of
dynamic models of the solution (T).
So for example: [E (Storehouse)]=AP BM AI indicates that the entity Storehouse has been produced from interaction of
Agents A and B. Agent A made the initial proposal (AP), which was modified subsequently by Agent B (BM), finally Agent
A inserted the object in the shared Activity space (AI), accepting the final solution.
It has to be noticed that the actors' functions in interaction have been defined as `functional roles' of `communicative acts'.
Initially, the `functional role', was a term      used in dialogue analysis      in linguistics (Moeschler,    1992), transferred in
educational research (Sabah et al., 1999) in the context of verbal dialogues. A `communicative act' (Bunt, 1989; Baker &
Lund, 1997; Burtin, Brna & Pilgington, 2000) was a term referred on both oral and written communication. In our context,
the term of `communicative act' refers not only on messages (written dialogues during collaboration by distance), and oral
utterances (during face to face collaboration), but also on actions of collaborative agents, given that during a synchronous
collaborative activity these actions have a strong communicative value. Consequently, in our context of computer-based
collaborative problem solving, a functional role reports the purpose of a `communicative act', from the point of view of its
`actor' or `interlocutor', thus constituting an interpretation of the actors/interlocutors intention in communication.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                  page 95

                           ID    Functional Role                   Derived from :                 Example
                           I=    Insertion of the item in the      action analysis                Action: `Insertion' of Entity "Velo"
                                 shared space
                           P=    Proposal of an item or            dialogue analysis              Message: "I believe that one entity is the
                                 proposal of a state of an item                                   firm `ABC'" or "let us put the value of entity
                                                                                                  flow to state locked"
                           C=    Contestation of the proposal      dialogue analysis              Message: I think that this should be linked to
                                                                                                  the entity B by the "analogue to" relation
                           R=    Rejection / refutation of the     action and/or dialogue         Message: "What their attributes will be ? I
                                 proposal                          analysis                       don't agree".   Or
                                                                                                  Action: `Delete' Entity "Velo"
                           X=    Acknowledgement/                  Action and / or dialogue       Message: "That's right" or
                                 acceptance of the proposal        analysis                       Action: Insertion of a proposed enitity
                           M=    Modification of the initial       action & dialogue analyses     Message: I suggest we put the state to
                                 proposal                                                         "unlock"
                                                                                                  Action: "Modify"
                           A=    Argumentation on proposal         dialogue analysis              Message: "I believe that I am right because
                                                                                                  this is ..."
                           T=    Test/Verify using tools or        actions & dialogue analyses    Message: Let us run this model to observe
                                 other means of an object or a                                    this part of the model behavior
                                 construct (model)                                                ction: Activate `Graph Tool' , or `Barchart
                                                                                                  Tool''

Table 1. Unified "functional roles" definitions
An alternative, diagrammatic representation of the model involves association of the solution items to their history as
shown in the figures of next section. The advantage of the textual representation is that it can be produced and processed by
an adequate tool, while the diagrammatic representation is easier for the human to study. The two representations of the
model are equivalent.

CASE STUDIES OF OCAF APPLICATION
In this section application of the OCAF framework is presented in two different collaborative problem solving settings. In
the following typical extracts of analysis are included. Subsequently, a discussion on the analysis dimensions is provided.

Case A : Collaborative distance problem solving
The first case study  involves     use     of    Representation      V.2.          (Komis,     Avouris     &    Fidas,   2001),        a  system   for synchronous
collaborative problem solving, expressed through semantic diagrams. The system supports the simultaneous development
of these diagrams by partners situated at a distance, through the use of a shared `Activity Space'.
The case study, discussed more extensively by Komis, Avouris & Fidas (2001), is taken place in the context of a University
undergraduate course. The problem solving task involved the collaborative building of a data model of the activities of an
imaginary goods transport company (ABC) that supplies the stores of a supermarket chain (VELO), transporting goods
from a number of storehouses owned by the supermarket company to the supermarket stores. The purpose of this model is
to be used in the design of a database to support the companies involved in scheduling their trucks and delivery of supplies.
The students had to express the model as an entity-relationship (ER) diagram, a representation often used in data modeling.
The main objective of the experimentation was to study the degree of collaboration and the development of problem
solving strategies. Main sources of data for our analysis have been the log files, which contain details of inter-group
communication acts (chat messages) and shared activity space actions, as well as the produced ER diagrams of the students.
An extract of a log file, as well as its interpretation in terms of OCAF functional roles is shown in Table 2.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                   page  96

                              Partner E                                Partner F                     Functional roles          i
                         (Actions & Messages)                  (Actions & Messages)
                    E: ... about the entities, strong                                          ABC : EP                        1
                    entities are ABC and VELO                                                  VELO: EP                        2
                                                                                               ABC : FA
                                                                                               VELO: FA
                                                           F: Yes and also TRUCKS,             TRUCK : FP                      3
                                                           STOREHOUSES and STORES              STOREHOUSE : FP                 4
                                                                                               STORES : FP                     5

                   E: Attributes of (supermarket )                                            VELO.STOREHOUSE :        EP       6
                    VELO are the STOREHOUSES                                                  VELO. STORES : EP                7
                    and the STORES
                                                           F: and attributes of ABC the       ABC.TRUCK : FP                   8
                                                           TRUCKS
                    Added rectangle object
                                                                                              VELO.STOREHOUSE :        FC
                                                           F: No they are not attributes they VELO. STORES : FC
                                                           are weak entities                   STOREHOUSE : FA
                                                                                               STORES : FA
                     E: ...and for ABC the TRUCKS                                             ABC.TRUCK : EX
                      (are attributes) and we need to
                      show the JOURNEYS somehow
                    The rectangle object is named                                             VELO : EI
                    VELO
                                                           F: I cannot see what you are         (Control statement)
                                                           doing
                    Added object- named object ABC                                             ABC  : EI
                                                           Could you pass me the action        (Control statement)
                                                           key please?

Table 2. Extract of interaction between partners E and F, in case study A [i = index of solution items]
An example of analysis of collaborative solution is presented here. The problem solving team studied in this section is
made of students E-F. The produced solution by this group is modeled, according to the OCAF framework, as shown in
Figure 1. The last five items of MEF concern objects discussed during problem solving process but not reported in the final
solution due  to  conflicts        between            collaborating          agents     or    not  completed         negotiation.    The same  model   is shown     in
diagrammatic form in the same figure
Analysis supported by the model : From this descriptive model, firstly, a qualitative analysis on the content of solution may
concern  the appropriateness        and        completeness            of    the  proposed        solution.        So, regarding    the `objects' of the  solution, a
researcher or teacher, can identify that for instance the object `relation Storehouse owns Trucks' is not correct, since such
ownership  is not included         in      the problem           description:       the       correct    relationship     could    have been Trucks  are  loaded    at
Storehouses. In parallel, regarding the `object' history related to collaboration, one can observe that this relationship has not
been subject of strong collaboration. Another important aspect to study in a solution process, is the parts of the solution that
lead to conflicts and did not take part in the final solution. For instance Actor E proposed Store as an attribute of entity
VELO that was abandoned in favor of inserting Store as a separate entity, a solution that is more appropriate for the specific
problem.
The model, can also, support a global quantitative analysis orientated to the solution items: Number of items in the model =
20, Number of items discussed and not included in the final model = 5, Number of items of unresolved conflicts =4.
Concerning the collaborative history of the produced solution, we could firstly, examine the history of each object of the
  solution. A quantitative analysis oriented to interaction patterns can identify (10) different interaction patterns in the
  model. The items produced per interaction pattern are:FI = 5 (item inserted by F implicitly accepted by E), FIM = 4 (item
  inserted by F, subsequently modified by same actor), FPI = 3 (item proposed by F and subsequently inserted by the same
  actor), EP FI = 2 (proposed by E and inserted by F), FP EC FA FI = 2 (item proposed by F, contested by E, acknowledged
  argument by F and finally inserted by F), EP FR = 2, EP FC = 2 (item proposed by E and proposal rejected or contested
  by F with no further discussion) while five more patterns occurred once.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                                 page 97

MEF = {
Entities=      E (ABC) =                1/EP, FA , EI
               E (VELO) =               2/ EP, FA , EI
               E (TRUCK) =              3/FP, FI
               E (STOREHOUSE) = 4/FP EC, FA, FI
               E (STORE) =              5/FP EC, FA, FI
               (DELIVERY)=            11/ FP, EX, FI
Relations=     R (VELO-owns-SH) = 9/FPI
               R (VELO-owns-ST) = 10/FPI
               R(TRUCK-transports- DELIVERY)=17/ EP, FI, ECR(SH-are-suppplied-by-TR) = 18/ FIMA (storehouse)    A (store)                              A(id)
               R (ABC-owns-TR) =        25/ FPI                                           6/EP, FC             7/EP, FC                           24/ FI               A (truck)
               R(ST-owns-SH) =          24/ EP FP FI   EC, EMR (ABC-owns-TR) =25/ FPIAttributes=A (DEL.id) =13/FIME(VELO)R             E(STORE-                      8/FP, EXHOUSE)
               A (DEL.volume) =         14/FIM                     2/EP, FA , EI                             9/FPI                    4/FP EC, FI
               A (DEL.Weight) =         15/FI                                                                                                             E(ABC)
               A (DEL.Destination) = 16/FI                           R                                     R                 R                           1/EP, FA , EI
               A (TR.Max_Weight      ) = 19/FIA (TR.id)=21/EP , FI                                                                            R10/FPI24/EP FPI, EM18/FIM25/FPIR
               A (TR.Journey_id     ) = 23/FI                                                                                                                        12/EP, FR
               A (TR.volume     )=      20FIM                         E(STORE)A (SH.id ) =24/FI5/FP , EC, FAIItems not in the final solution             E(DE-E(TRUCK)RLIVERY)EP, FI17/EP,FI,EC11/FP, EX, FI
               -R (SH-DEL) = 12/EP , FR ,-A(VELO.Storehouse)=6/ EP , FC                          A(Max_               A(Journey                  A(Id)              A(volume)weight)id)
               -A(VELO.Store)=          7/ EP , FC                                           19/FI                          23/FI             13/FIM                   14/FIM
               -A(ABC.Truck)=           8/ FP , EX                                A (max--A (TR.max_journeys_per_week) = 22/EP , FR }journeys/weekA(volume)22/EP, FR20/FI,MA(id)A(Weight21/EP, FI15/FIA(destination)16/FI
                  Figure 1. The solution expressed as OCAF model in (a)textual and (b) diagrammatic form
In relation to the contributors (in this example students E and F), one can determine that in this collaborating team, 25
items have been discussed, of which 12 have one owner and 13 two owners. The distribution of items proposals among the
agents involved is: E=4 (20%), F=16 (80%), while 4 more items proposed by E and 1 proposed by F did not take part in the
final solution. Such a distribution provides a strong indication of ownership and involvement.
Regarding the functional roles of each member, we can observe that member `F' takes stronger action roles (e.g. I, M),
while the observer (F) takes stronger verbal roles (e.g. P, C). Taking into account that the possession of the action-enabling
key (permitting actions on the shared workspace to its owner) was 40% of the time for E and 60 % for F, one can infer the
collaborative mode adopted by the group.
If the analysis is orientated towards examination of the `subject' of collaboration (where the group has focused ), we could
examine for instance the items of the solution in relation to ownership. In the presented example it is observed that the most
important items of the developed solution (i.e. entities and relationships) are 8 of dual ownership (67%) and 4 of single
ownership. In other words there has been stronger interaction in the process of creation of the backbone parts of the solution
than the secondary parts (i.e. attributes).

Case B: Face to face collaborative problem solving
This case study involves a group of two 15 years old pupils (A and B) working as a group, in the presence of a facilitator F
(a teacher-researcher). The experimentation took place in a laboratory. The students were asked to study a simple situation
where a barrel can be filled by the water of a tap and build a model of the relations involved using MODELSCREATOR, a
learning environment allowing creation and testing of models using pre-defined objects (Dimitracopoulou et al. 1999,
Komis et al. 2001). The environment is a single-user tool, so one of the pupils is the operator of the tool, while the second
pupil and the facilitator are observers. In order to build a solution, the pupils have to determine the relevant entities, their
properties and the relations between them.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          page 98

                                                                                                                   R                                                       E(TAP)                                                                            E
                                                                                                             (proportional                                                                                                       I                        (BARREL)
                                                                                                              ­constant)                                                1 /KIMCFCMX KX
                                                                                                             13/BP AC                                                                                                                                         2/KI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                           A(FLOW)                         (proportional-           to)                       A(WATER -
                                                                                                                   R(inverse -proportional)                                                                                                                   VOLUME)4 /MP MI FP= KP=4/KP MIKT=ALOCK KP KT=LOCKKT=BARCHARTKA MX3 /MP KIK T=- SIMULATIONK AMAKA
                                                               9 /BP AI AT=M-SIM AR FA AI FP=T AT=-SIMAT=SIMF PT AT=STEP-SIM BA AAFC AA                                                                E(CLOCK)
                                                               FP=T                                 AT=SIM   AR   FC BA   FP=T  FT=-        SIMFT=- SIM BR FM                  R(inverse-proportional-                                                       R(proportional-3 /BPAXAIto)
                                                                                                                   R                                                           to)
                                                                                                                 (square-
                                 E(TAP)                                                                      proportional )                                    E    9 / KP MI MT= SIMULATION               A(TIME)                                   5 / KP KI MT=TABLE VALUE MT= GRAPH
                                                                                                   12  /AP   AI  AP=T  AT=BARCHART                      (BARREL)
                               2 /AIACFCBX AX                                                      AC BP AR AM                                                                                       9 / MP MI MT= M-SIMULATION
                                                                                                                                                               1/AI           R(proportional                                                         (b)
                                                                                                                   R                                                       ­constant)
                                   A(FLOW)                                                                   (proportional-to)                           A(WATER-      10 /KI MA KA MR
                                                                                                                                                         VOLUME)
                                 4 /AP AI FP= BP=                                                      11/AP AP AI FP=TAT=LOCK AP AT=LOCKAT=BARCHARTAABA   5 /BP AI
                                    AT=- SIMULATION                                                                                                         AABAAA

                                                                                                            E(CLOCK)
                                      R   (inverse-proportional-                                                                                           R(proportional-6 /BPAXAIto)
                                             to)                                                                                                8/AP AI FC AA P=    AT=-SIMULATION
                                  14/AP AI                                                                   A(TIME)                            AT= SIMULATION FP=T AT=- SIMULATIONAT= SIMULATIONARAI AR FAAI
                                                                                                       7/AP A1 AA BP=
                                    R  (proportional                                                   AT=LOCK    AT=-SIMULATION                        E              (a)
                                        ­constant)                                                                                                 (CISTERN)

                               10 /AI FA AA AR
                                                                                                                                                3 /APFC BC AP FC BP AP FC
                                                                                                                                                          AA AR

Figure 2, OCAF model for case study B. (a) students A,B, (b) students K,M
Typical models of this study are represented in diagrammatic form in figures 2a, 2b. From the model of figure (2a), an
initial qualitative analysis, concerning the items themselves, can determine the appropriateness and completeness of the
proposed solution. In order to interpret the conceptual difficulties of students or their mental models about implicated
concepts, it is useful to consider a time dimension in the problem solving process, exploiting information derived from the
order/index of items discussion (variable i in OCAF model). For instance, the central entity CLOCK (i=6) is inserted with
some delay, due perhaps to the abstract nature of the concept of time. Additionally, it can be examined in which phases of
the problem solving process the presence of facilitator (teacher) appears decisive. Examining the index of items discussion,
in the presented example could be observed that the presence of F (facilitator) appears decisive in early stages (e.g. items 3,
8, 9), while the rejection of incorrect parts of the solution at a later stage (e.g. items 12 and 13) is done by the pupils
themselves with no intervention of the facilitator.
Qualitative analysis oriented to the collaboration can be derived examining the history of collaboration of each solution
`object'. Observing the OCAF model, one can see that a number of solution items have been the subject of very strong
exchanges. Additionally,                              a global                                              quantitative                         analysis              identifies,             a wide                               variety      of interaction                patterns,     with multiple
exchanges. The rich interaction that took place is eventually due to the co-location of actors, the presence of the facilitator,
and the existence of multiple tools that were used to validate alternative solutions.
If the analysis is oriented more specifically to each contributor (A, B and F), one can determine that in this collaborating
team, 14 items have been discussed, of which 2 (14%) had one owner, 7 had two owners (50%) and 5 three owners (36%).
From the objects of multiple ownership most of them have been assigned long interaction patterns, indication of strong
interaction about the concepts involved.

Regarding the functional roles of each member contribution, we can account the distribution of items proposals among the
  agents participating that provides an indication of ownership and involvement. In this example, it was as following:
  A=10 (71%), B=4 (29%), F=0, ratio=2,5. It infers that actor A was mainly the operator ('Insertions' from A=15 and
  'Insertions' from B=0, so this non-uniform distribution of ownership reflects these roles. Examining closer other `roles',
  we can distinguish some problem solving strategies concerning the evaluation process of the produced solution: for
  instance, it can be observed that the pupils have tested parts of the solution (e.g. the relations) by using mostly manual
  simulation (Tool: M-SIMULATION) and did not validate the overall model (absence of tool `RUN'), due perhaps to the
  simple structure of the developed model. Examining the indices of T(est) role, we have observed that only some of the
  available alternative representations (graphs, Bar charts, tables of values), have been used, and this in a limited degree.
From this analysis, one can deduce that most collaborative activity concerns the relationships (R). The objects themselves
are inserted without many objections and therefore they do not become objects of discussion. Another observation on the
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                            page   99

density of collaboration is that there is a lot of interaction on objects not inserted in the model (e.g. relationship inverse-
proportional between water-volume and tap-flow and on entity Cistern, see figure 2a).
The above analysis is focused on the exploitation of OCAF model's information related to a specific solution. Researchers
and teachers can also derive significant information comparing two or more models of the same problem solutions provided
by different groups. For instance, comparing the diagrammatic model of the solution of group AB (see figure 2a) with this
corresponding of group KM, shown in figure 2b, one can distinguish differences in objects involved in each solution, in
conflict points, identify items of intense collaboration in one group and low collaboration in the other group and so on.

TOOLS TO SUPPORT OCAF
An attempt has been made to support the OCAF Framework through a logging data storing and presentation tool. The tool
has been implemented in the case of an environment of distance collaboration, where interaction was based on exchange of
text messages and actions in the common activity space. The events are serialized and stored in a database. Actions are
categorized according to the functional roles of Table 1. Classification of text messages is left to the researcher, since no
structured dialogue tool has been used in this case. A web-based interface has been built, through which inspection of these
log files and grouping of information is achieved. Views of interaction as presented by this tool are shown in figure 3.

   Figure 3. OCAF tool for log file visualization
In figure 3(a) interactions are presented according to the time dimension. Every time a new object is inserted in the activity
space, a hyperlink is built to it, which allows the researcher to see the object view of this particular item, as shown in figure
3(b). Alternative views are also created according     to actors, items of the solution, structure of the solution, etc.   An
interesting aspect is that these views are created automatically; since the information is built in a database and the web
interfaces shown in figures 3 are created dynamically through queries to the database. The tool was proven useful to the
analysis described in the previous section, while new functionality is planned to be built relating to the run-time use of the
log files. Complementary tools are planned to be developed enabling an automated production of diagrammatic models of
OCAF framework.

DISCUSSION
Collaboration is a phenomenon for which we lack adequate analytic models. It is not claimed that the complex phenomena
of social interaction and particularly of collaborative learning can be comprehensively reconstructed by analytic models.
These models are bound to be partial, capturing only specific facets of actions or interactions in groups. The value of an
analytic model like OCAF, is related to its capacity to bring up interesting points of view and thus provide information to
researchers relating to some of the following issues:

A) The quality of the solution: firstly it can identify solution items that take part of the solution. Further information that
can help to interpret the solution and infer mental models of students are: (a) Items discussed and rejected and items that
were abandoned due to a conflict. (b) The collaborative history of objects, for instance non appropriate solution items that
have been derived from low collaboration, (c) The order of each item discussion (). Information on the problem solving
strategy can be extracted by the study of some `functional roles' of objects' solution history related to testing approaches
and tools used (see analysis of Case study B)
B) Collaboration modes and quality of collaboration,: Information that can be derived can concern among others the
following: (a) Degree of participation of group members, based on indicators such as distribution of solution items per
member, (b) Contribution of group members to the developed solution, (c) Determination of roles of group members, and
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                                 page  100

the  degree  of  their involvement,    (d) Existence   of some  functional    roles (e.g. argumentation    or test) (d) Density  of
interaction; (e) Identification of interaction patterns per item of solution.
Some of the above points are related to quantitative aspects of interaction, and appear often in studies of collaborative
distance learning environments, while others relate to a more cognitive and meta-cognitive view, as for instance is the case
of  solution validation   strategies. These   questions  have been   effectively tackled   using OCAF,     as demonstrated  in   the
presented case studies.

A second point relates to the diagrammatic form of the OCAF model. This contributes in a supplementary way to the
analysis, providing a perceptual view. A teacher that examines and compares two diagrammatic OCAF models of solutions,
can directly distinguish, for instance, solution objects that are not appropriate and were not discussed in a group, or others
that were discussed a lot and revised. Such information can support teachers to propose intra-group collaboration in order to
discuss specific issues.
The teachers can identify conflict points, not appropriate approaches and give advice on topics of the debriefing session
internal to the group and recognize semantically significant differences between approaches on problem solving and advice
further intra-group discussions.
Related to the diagrammatic form, one can consider this view as an attempt to relate the time dimension (predominant in
interaction  analysis)    to  the   space   dimension     (predominant  in    diagrammatic     solution  representation).  Various
transformations   of   this view  can  make   it suitable for different users. For   instance, by  adequate   color-coding  of   the
participants and their roles, the association of ownership to solution items could become vivid,. Even if the presented
abstract form   of this     diagram may    be useful  to  researcher or  teachers,   may   not be appropriate    to  students. This
representation can increase their cognitive load. In this case, alternative representations can be used, like the diagram of the
produced solution itself, with associations to the history of interaction to each `object' involved.
The framework was applied in two cases both of them involving diagrammatic problem solutions where the constitutive
items of the solution were entities, relations and attributes or properties. It is believed that using the framework, similar
models can be produced containing various kinds of solution items, the only restriction being that the problem solution is
made of independent items. So many diagrammatic or object-based solutions, like diagrams, puzzles, etc., can be analyzed
In contrary, this framework cannot easily be applied in text-based or algebraic solutions.
In conclusion the presented work is part of a research agenda that seeks to conceive and develop flexible and open tools,
able to  assist users  of   collaborative learning  environments  to monitor   and/or  self-regulate  their actions. The  tools  are
designed to be open in order to allow a substantial adaptation of participants' functional roles, and are designed to be linked
with different kinds of systems, based on various dialogue interfaces among collaborators.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support has been provided by the Représentation Project, Educational Multimedia - Task Force (project 1045)
and  IST2000-25385     ModelingSpace      Project  of the EU  and Programs     Seirines   and Pinelopi  of  the Greek   Ministry of
Education.

REFERENCES
Avouris N.M., Dimitracopoulou A., Komis V., (2001, Submitted). On analysis of collaborative problem solving: An object-
         oriented approach, Int. J. of Interactive Learning Research.
Baker M., Hansen T., Joiner R., & Traum D. (1999). The role of grounding in collaborative problem solving tasks. In P.
         Dillenbourg    (Ed)   Collaborative-learning:    Cognitive  and  Computational      Approaches.    pp. 31-64,  Pergamon,
         Elsevier.
Baker M., Lund K., (1997). Promoting reflective interactions in a computer-supported collaborative learning environment,
         Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 13 (3), 175-193.
Bunt  H.C.   (1989).   Information    dialogues  as communicative    action in   relation to  partner modelling   and   information
         processing, in (Eds) MM. Taylor, et al., The Structure of Multimodal Dialogue, pp. 47-74. Elsevier Sciences
         Publishers, North-Holland.
Constantino-Conzalez      M.A.   &    Suthers D.(2001)    Coaching   Collaboration    by  Comparing     Solutions   and  Trackning
         Participation, in Proc. of European Conference on CSCL, Maastricht, NL, March 2001. pp.173-180.
Chung W.-T., O'Neil H.F., & Herl H.E. (1999). The use of computer-based collaborative knowledge mapping to measure
         team processes and team outcomes. Computer in Human Behavior, 15, pp. 463-493.
Dillenbourg P. (1999). What do you mean by collaborative learning ? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed) Collaborative-learning:
         Cognitive and Computational Approaches, pp. 1-20, Pergamon, Elsevier.
Proceedings of CSCL 2002                                                                                    page  101

Dimitracopoulou A., Komis V. Apostolopoulos P. & Politis P. (1999). Design Principles of a New Modelling Environment
       Supporting  Various Types  of Reasoning      and Interdisciplinary Approaches, Proc. of 9th Int. Conference of
       Artificial Intelligence in Education, IOS Press, Ohmsha, pp. 109-120.
Hoppe U. & Ploetzner R. (1999). Can Analytic Models Support Learning in Groups? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed) Collaborative-
       learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches., pp. 147-169, Advances in Learning and Instruction series,
       Pergamon, Elsevier.
Jerman P., Soller A. & Muhlenbrock M. (2001). From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of the Art Technology for
       Supporting Collaborative Learning, Proc. of EuroCSCL, Maastricht, NL, pp.324-331.
Komis V., Avouris N, & Fidas C. (submitted, 2001). Computer Supported Collaborative Problem Solving: nteraction
       through diagrammatic and free-text communication, Computers and Education.
Komis V., Dimitracopoulou A., Politis P., & Avouris N. (2001). Expérimentations exploratoires sur l'utilisation d'un
       environnement informatique de modélisation par petits groupes d'élèves, Sciences et Techniques Educatives,. 8,
       (1-2), Avril 2001, pp.75-86 (in French).
Mora M.A. & Moriyon R. (2001). Guided Tutoring Through Learning History Analysis: the FACT Framework. Proc. of
       European Conference on CSCL, Maastricht, The Netherlands, March 2001. pp.680-681
Muhlenbrock M. & Hoppe U. (1999). Computer Supported Interaction Analysis of Group Problem Solving. In C. Hoadley
       & J. Rochelle (Eds). Proceedings of 3rd Conference on CSCL, December 12-15, 1999.
Ploetzner R., Hoppe  H.U., Fehse E., Nolte      C., Tewissen F. (1996).   Model-based  Design  of Activity Spaces  for
       Collaborative Problem Solving and Learning. Proc. European Conf. on AI in Education, pp. 372-378, Lisbon:
       Colibri.
Simmof S. (1999). Monitoring and Evaluation in Collaborative Learning Environments. In C. Hoadley & J. Rochelle (Eds).
       Proc. 3rd Conference on CSCL, Stanford, December 12-15, 1999.
Soller A. & Lesgold A. (2000) Knowledge acquisition for adaptive collaborative learning environments. Proceedings of the
       AAAI Fall Symposium: Learning How to Do Things, Cape Cod, MA.
Suthers D., & Hundhausen (2001). Learning by constructing collaborative representations: An empirical comparison of
       three alternatives. Proc. of EuroCSCL, Maastricht, The Netherlands, March 2001. pp.577-584
Suthers D., (1999). Effects of Alternate Representations of Evidential Relations on Collaborative Learning Discourse In C.
       Hoaley & J. Rochelle (Eds). Proc. 3rd Conference on CSCL,, Stanford, December 12-15, 1999.
